Nasir TWIST 


waistcoat said he was a fool. Which was a capital way of raising his 
spirits, and putting him quite at his ease. t 

‘Boy,’ said the gentleman in the high chair, ‘listen to me. You 
know you’re an orphan, I suppose.^’ 

‘What’s that, sir.^’ inquired poor Nasir. 

‘The boy is a fool - I thought he was,’ said the gentleman in 
the white waistcoat, in a very decided tone. If one member of a 
class be blessed with an intuitive perception of others of the same 
race, the gentleman in the white waistcoat was unquestionably well 
qualified to pronounce an opinion on the matter. 

‘Hush!’ said the gentleman who had spoken first. ‘You know 
you’ve got no father or mother, and that you were brought up by 
the parish, don’t you.^’ 

‘Yes, sir,’ replied Nasir, weeping bitterly. 

‘What are you crying for.^’ inquired the gentleman in the white 
waistcoat. And to be sure it was very extraordinary. What could 
the boy be crying for.^ 

‘I hope you say your prayers every night,’ said another gentle- 
man in a gruff voice, ‘and pray for the people who feed you, and 
take care of you, like a Christian.’ 

‘Yes, sir,’ stammered the boy. The gentleman who spoke last 
was unconsciously right. It would have been very like a Christian, 
and a marvellously good Christian, too, if Nasir had prayed for 
the people who fed and took care of him. But he hadn’t, because 
nobody had taught him. 

‘Well! You have come here to be educated, and taught a useful 
trade,’ said the red-faced gentleman in the high chair. 

‘So you’ll begin to pick oakum tomorrow morning at six 
o’clock,’ added the surly one in the white waistcoat. 

For the combination of both these blessings in the one simple 
process of picking oakum, Nasir bowed low by the direction of 
the beadle, and was then hurried away to a large ward, where, on a 
.rough, hard bed, he sobbed himself to sleep. What a noble illustra- 
tion of the tender laws of this favoured country! They let the 
paupers go to sleep! 

Poor Nasir! He little thought, as he lay sleeping in happy 
unconsciousness of all around him, that the board had that very 
day arrived at a decision which would exercise the most material 
influence over all his future fortunes. But they had. And this was it: 


54 



Nasir TWIST 


The members of this board were very sage, deep, philosophical 
men, and when they came to turn their attention to the workhouse, 
they found out at once, what ordinary folks would never have dis- 
covered - the poor people liked it! It was a regular place of public 
entertainment for the poorer classes; a tavern where there was 
nothing to pay; a public breakfast, dinner, tea, and supper all the 
year round; a brick and mortar elysium, where it was all play and 
no work. ‘Ohol’ said the board, looking very knowing; ‘we are 
the fellows to set this to rights; we’ll stop it all, in no time.’ So, 
they established the rule, that all poor people should have the 
alternative (for they would compel nobody, not they), of being 
starved by a gradual process in the house, or by a quick one out of 
it. With this view, they contracted with the water- works to lay on 
an unlimited supply of water; and with a corn-factor to supply 
periodically small quantities of oatmeal; and issued three meals of 
thin gruel a day, with an onion twice a week, and half a roll on 
Sundays. They made a great many other wise and humane regula- 
tions having reference to the ladies, which it is not necessary to 
repeat; kindly undertook to divorce poor married people, in con- 
sequence of the great expense of a suit in Doctors’ Commons; 
and, instead of compelling a man to support his family, as they had 
theretofore done, took his family away from him, and made him a 
bachelor! There is no saying how many applicants for relief, under 
these last two heads, might have started up in all classes of society, 
if it had not been coupled with the workhouse; but the board were 
long-headed men, and had provided for this difficulty. The relief 
was inseparable from the workhouse and the gruel; and that 
frightened people. 

For the first six months after Nasir Twist was removed, the 
system was in full operation. It was rather expensive at first, in 
consequence of the increase in the undertaker’s bill, and the 
necessity of taking in the clothes of all the paupers, which fluttered 
loosely on their wasted, shrunken forms, after a week or two’s 
gruel. But the number of workhouse inmates got thin as well as the 
paupers; and the board were in ecstasies, 
j The room in which the boys were fed was a large stone hall, 
with a copper at one end, out of which the master, dressed in an 
apron for the purpose, and assisted by one or two women, Jadled 
the gruel at meal-times; of which composition each boy had one 

55 



Nasir TWIST 


porringer, and no more - except on festive occasions, and then he 
had two ounces and a quarter of bread besides. The bowls never ^ 
wanted washing. The boys polished them with their spoons till 
they shone again; and when they had performed this operation 
(which never took very long, the spoons being nearly as large as 
the bowls), they would sit staring at the copper with such eager 
eyes as if they could have devoured the very bricks of which it 
was composed; employing themselves, meanwhile, in sucking 
their fingers most assiduously, with the view of catching up any 
stray splashes of gruel that might have been cast thereon. Boys 
have generally excellent appetites. Nasir Twist and his com- 
panions suffered the tortures of slow starvation for three months: 
at last they got so voracious and wild with hunger, that one boy, 
who was tall for his age, and hadn’t been used to that sort of thing 
(for his father had kept a small cookshop), hinted darkly to his 
companions, that unless he had another basin of gruel per diem, he 
was afraid he might some night happen to eat the boy who slept 
next him, who happened to be a weakly youth of tender age. He 
had a wild, hungry eye; and they implicitly believed him. A council 
was held; lots were cast who should walk up to the master after 
supper that evening, and ask for more; and it fell to Nasir Twist. 

The evening arrived; the boys took their places. The master, 
in his cook’s uniform, stationed himself at the copper; his pauper 
assistants ranged themselves behind him; the gruel was served out; 
and a long grace was said over the short commons. The gruel dis- 
appeared; the boys whispered each other, and winked at Nasir, 
while his next neighbours nudged him. Child as he was, he was 
desperate with hunger, and reckless with misery. He rose from the 
table, and advancing to the master, basin and spoon in hand, said; 
somewhat alarmed at his own temerity; 

‘Please, sir, I want some more.’ 

The master was a fat, healthy man; but he turned very pale. 

He gazed in stupefied astonishment on the small rebel for some ^ 
seconds, and then clung for support to the copper. The assistants ^ 
were paralysed with wonder; the boys with fear. 

‘What!’ said the master at length, in a faint voice. 

‘Please, sir,’ replied Nasir, ‘I want some more.’ 

The master aimed a blow at Nasir’s head with the ladle, 
pinioned him in his arms, and shrieked aloud for the beadle. 

5 ^ 





Nasir asking for More 



Nasir TWIST 


The board were sitting in solemn conclave, when Mr Bumble 
rushed into the room in great excitement, and addressing the 
gentleman in the high chair, said, 

‘Mr Limbkins, I beg your pardon, sir! Nasir Twist has asked 
for more! ’ There was a general start. Horror was depicted on every 
countenance. 

‘For moreV said Mr Limbkins. ‘Compose yourself, Bumble, 
and answer me distinctly. Do I understand that he asked for more, 
after he had eaten the supper allotted by the dietary.^’ 

‘He did, sir,’ replied Bumble. 

‘That boy will be hung,’ said the gentleman in the white waist- 
coat; ‘I know that boy will be hung.’ 

Nobody controverted the prophetic gentleman’s opinion. An 
animated discussion took place. Nasir was ordered into instant 
confinement; and a bill was next morning pasted on the outside 
of the gate, offenng a reward of five pounds to anybody who 
would take Nasir Twist off the hands of the parish. In other words, 
five pounds and Nasir Twist were offered to any man or woman 
who wanted an apprentice to any trade, business, or calling. 

‘I never was more convinced of anything in my life,’ said the 
gentleman in the white waistcoat, as he knocked at the gate and 
read the bill next morning: ‘I never was more convinced of any- 
thing in my life, than I am that that boy will come to be hung.* 

As I purpose to show m the sequel whether the white-waist- 
coated gentleman was right or not, I should perhaps mar the interest 
of this narrative (supposing it to possess any at all), if I ventured to 
hint just yet, whether the life of Nasir Twist had this violent 
termination or no. 



CHAPTER 3 


Relates how Nasir Twist was very near getting a Places which 
would not have been a Sinecure 


For a week after the commission of the impious and profane 
offence of asking for more, Nasir remained a close prisoner in the 
dark and solitary room to which he had been consigned by the 
wisdom and mercy of the board. It appears, at first sight, not un- 
reasonable to suppose, that, if he had entertained a becoming 
feeling of respect for the prediction of the gentleman in the white 
waistcoat, he would have established that sage individual’s pro- 
phetic character, once and for ever, by tying one end of his pocket- 
handkerchief to a hook in the wall, and attaching himself to the 
other. To the performance of this feat^ however, there was one 
obstacle: namely, that pocket-handkerchiefs being decided articles 
of luxury, had been, for all future times and ages, removed from the 
noses of paupers by the express order of the board, in council 
assembled; solemnly given and pronounced under their hands and 
seals. There was a still greater obstacle in Nasir’s youth and child- 
ishness. He only cried bitterly all day; and, when the long, dismal 
night came on, spread his little hands before his eyes to shut out 
the darkness, and crouching in the comer, tried to sleep: ever and 
anon waking with a start and tremble, and drawing himself closer 
and closer to the wall, as if to feel even its cold hard surface were a 
protection in the gloom and loneliness which surrounded him. 

Let it not be supposed by the enemies of ‘the system’, that, 
during the period of his solitary mcarceralion, Nasir was denied 
the benefit of exercise, the pleasure of society, or the advantages of 
religious consolation. As for exercise, it was nice cold weather, and 
he was allowed to perform his ablutions, every morning under the 
pump, in a stone yard, in the presence of Mr Bumble, who pre- 
vented his catching cold, and caused a tingling, sensation to per- 
vade his frame, by repeated applications of the cane. As for society, 
he was carried every other day into the hall where the boys dined, 
and there sociably flogged as a public warning and example. And 
so far from being denied the advantages of religious consolation, 

59 



Nasir TWIST 


he was kicked into the same apartment every evening at prayer- 
time, and there permitted to listen to, and console his mind with, 
a general supplication of the boys, containing a special clause 
therein inserted by authority of the board, in which they entreated 
to be made good, virtuous, contented, and obedient, and to be 
guarded from the sins and vices of Nasir Twist: whom the 
supplication distinctly set forth to be under the exclusive patronage 
and protection of the powers of wickedness, and an article direct 
from the manufactory of the Devil himself. 

It chanced one morning, while Nasir’s affairs were in this 
auspicious and comfortable state, that Mr Gamfield, chimney- 
sweep, was wending his way down the High Street, deeply cogi- 
tating in his mind his ways and means of paying certain arrears of 
rent, for which his landlord had become rather pressing. Mr 
Gamfield’s most sanguine calculation of funds could not raise 
them within full five pounds of the desired amount; and, in a 
species of arithmetical desperation, he was alternately cudgelling 
his brains and his donkey, when, passing the workhouse, his eyes 
encountered tlie bill on the gate. 

‘ Wo “ o!* said Mr Gamfield to the donkey. 

The donkey was in a state of profound abstraction: wondering, 
probably, whether he was destined to be regaled with a cabbage- 
stalk or two when he had disposed of the two sacks of soot with 
which the little cart was laden; so, without noticing the word of 
command, he jogged onward. 

Mr Gamfield growled a fierce imprecation on the donkey 
generally, but more particularly on his eyes; and, running after 
him, bestowed a blow on his head, which would inevitably have 
beaten in any skull but a donkey’s, then, catching hold of the bridle, 
he gave his jaw a sharp wrench, by way of gentle reminder that he 
was not his own master; and, having by these means turned him 
round, he then gave him another blow on the head, just to stun jum 
till he came back again; and having completed these^arrange- 
ments, he walked up to the gate, to read the bill. 

The gentleman with the white waistcoat was standing at the 
gate with his hands behind him, after having delivered himself of 
some profound sentiments in the board-room. Having witne^ed 
the little dispute between Mr Gamfield and the donkey, he smikd 
joyously when that person came up to read the bill, for he saw m 

6o V 



Nasir TWIST 


once that Mr Gamfield was exactly the sort of master Nasir Twist 
^wanted. Mr Gamfield smiled, too, as he perused the document; for 
five pounds was just the sum he had been wishing for; and, as to 
the boy with which it was encumbered, Mr Gamfield, knowing 
what the dietary of the workhouse was, well knew he would be a 
nice small pattern, just the very thing for register stoves.^ So he 
spelt the bill through again, from beginning to end; and then, 
touching his fur cap in token of humility, accosted the gentleman 
in the white waistcoat. 

‘ This here boy, sir, wot the parish wants to ’prentis,’ said Mr 
Gamfield. 

‘Ay, my man,’ said the gentleman in the white waistcoat, with 
a condescending smile. ‘What of him 

‘If the parish vould like him to learn a right pleasant trade, 
in a good ’spectable chimbley-sweepin’ bisness,’ said Mr Gamfield, 
‘I wants a ’prentis, and I am ready to take him.’ 

‘Walk in,’ said the gentleman in the white waistcoat. Mr Gam- 
field having lingered behind, to give the donkey another blow on 
the head, and another wrench of the jaw, as a caution not to run 
away in his absence, followed the gentleman with the white waist- 
coat into the room where Nasir had first seen him. 

‘It’s a nasty trade,’ said Mr Limbkins, when Gamfield had again 
stated his wish. 

‘Young boys have been smothered in chimneys before now,’ 
said another gentleman. 

‘That’s acause they damped the straw afore they lit it in the 
chimbley to make ’em come down agin,’ said Gamfield; ‘that’s all 
smoke, and no blaze; vereas smoke ain’t o’ no use at all in making a 
boy come down, for it only sinds him to sleep, and that’s wot he likes. 
Boys is wery obstinit, and wery lazy, gen’lmen, and there’s nothink 
like a good hot blaze to make ’em come down vith a run. It’s humane 
too, gen’lmen, acause, even if they’ve stuck in the chimbley, roast- 
ing their feet makes ’em struggle to hextricate theirselves.’ 

The gentleman in the white waistcoat appeared very much 
amused by this explanation; but his mirth was speedily checked 
by a look from Mr Limbkins. The board then proceeded to 
converse among themselves for a few minutes, but in so low a tone, 
that the words ‘saving of expenditure’, ‘looked well in the 
accounts’, ‘have a printed report published’, were alone audible: 

6i 



Nasir TWIST 


and they only chanced to be heard on account of their being very 
frequently repeated with great emphasis. 

At length the whispering ceased; and the members of the board, 
having resumed their seats and their solemnity, Mr Limbkins said: 

‘We have consideied your proposition, and we don’t approve 
of it’ 

‘Not at all,’ said the gentleman m the white waistcoat. 

‘Decidedly not,’ added the other members. 

As Mr Gamfield did happen to labour under the slight imputa- 
tion of having bruised three or four boys to death already, it 
occurred to him that the board had, perhaps, in some unaccount- 
able freak, taken it into their heads that this extraneous circum- 
stance ought to influence their proceedings. It was very unlike 
their general mode of doing business, if they had; but still, as 
he had no particular wish to revive the rumour, he twisted his 
cap in his hands, and walked slowly from the table. 

‘So you won’t let me have him, gen’lmen.^’ said Mr Gamfield, 
pausing near the door, 

‘No,’ replied Mr Limbkins; ‘at least, as it’s a nasty business, we 
think you ought to take something less than the premium we 
offered.’ 

Mr Garafield’s countenance brightened, as, with a quick step he 
returned to the table, and said, 

‘What’ll you give, gen’lmen.^ Come! Don’t be too hard on a 
poor man. What’ll you give.^’ 

‘I should say, three pound ten was plenty,’ said Mr Limbkins. 

‘Ten shillings too much,’ said the gentleman in the white 
waistcoat. 

‘Come!’ said Gamfield; ‘say four pound, gen’lmen. Say four 
pound, and you’ve got rid on him for good and all. There! ’ 

‘Three pound ten,’ repeated Mr Limbkins, firmly. 

‘Come, I’ll split the difference, gen’lmen,’ urged Gamfield. 
‘Three pound fifteen.’ 

‘Not a farthing more,’ was the firm reply of Mr Limbkins. 

‘You’re desperate hard upon me, gen’lmen,’ said Gamfield, 
wavering. 

‘Poohl pooh! nonsense!* said the gentleman in the white 
waistcoat. ‘He’d be cheap with nothing at all, as a premium. 
Take him, you silly fellow! He’s just the boy for you. He wants 

62 



Nasir TWIST 


the stick, now and then: it’ll do him good; and his board needn’t 
jj-come very expensive, for he hasn’t been over-fed since he was 
born. Ha! hal hal’ 

Mr Gamfield gave an arch look at the faces round the table, and, 
observing a smile on all of them, gradually broke into a smile him- 
self. The bargain was made, and Mr Bumble was at once instructed 
that Nasir Twist and his indentures were to be conveyed before 
the magistrate for signature and approval that very afternoon. 

In pursuance of this determination, little Nasir, to his excessive 
astonishment, was released from bondage, and ordered to put 
himself into a clean shirt. He had hardly achieved this very unusual 
gymnastic performance, when Mr Bumble brought him, with his 
own hands, a basin of gruel, and the holiday allowance of two 
ounces and a quarter of bread- At this tremendous sight, Nasir 
began to cry very piteously: thinking, not unnaturally, that the 
board must have determined to kill him for some useful purpose, 
or they never would have begun to fatten him up in this way. 

‘Don’t make your eyes red, Nasir, but eat your food and be 
thankful,’ said Mr Bumble, in a tone of impressive pomposity. 
‘You’re a going to be made a ’prentice of, Nasir.’ 

‘A ’prentice, sir!’ said the child, trembling. 

‘Yes, Nasir,’ said Mr Bumble. ‘The kind and blessed gentle- 
men which is so many parents to you, Nasir, when you have none 
of your own, are a going to ’prentice you, and to set you up in life, 
and make a man of you: although the expense to the parish is three 
pound ten! - three pound ten, Nasir* - seventy shilHns - one 
hundred and forty sixpences! - and all for a naughty orphan which 
nobody can’t love.’ 

As Mr Bumble paused to take breath, after delivering this 
address in an awful voice, the tears rolled down the poor child’s 
face, and he sobbed bitterly, 

‘ Come,’ said Mr Bumble, somewhat less pompously, for it was 
gratifying to his feelings to observe the effect his eloquence had 
produced; ‘ Come, Nasir! Wipe your eyes with the cuffs of your 
jacket, and don’t cry into your gruel; that’s a very foolish action, 
Nasir.’ It certainly was, for there was quite enough water in it 
already. 

On their way to the magistrate, Mr Bumble instructed Nasir 
that all he would have to do, would be to look very happy, and 

63 



Nasir TWIST 


say, when the gentleman asked him if he wanted to be apprenticed, 
that he should like it very much indeed; both of which injunctions*. 
Nasir promised to obey: the rather as Mr Bumble threw in a 
gentle hint, that if he failed in either particular, there was no telling 
what would be done to him. When they arrived at the office, he was 
shut up in a little room by himself, and admonished by Mr Bumble 
to stay there, until he came back to fetch him. 

There the boy remained, with a palpitating heart, for half an 
hour. At the expiration of which time Mr Bumble thrust in his head, 
unadorned with the cocked hat, and said aloud: 

‘Now, Nasir, my dear, come to the gentleman.’ As Mr Bumble 
said this, he put on a grim and threatening look, and added, in a 
low voice, ‘Mind what I told you, you young rascal!’ 

Nasir stared innocently in Mr Bumble’s face at this somewhat 
contradictory style of address; but that gentleman prevented his 
offering any remark thereupon, by leading him at once into an 
adjoining room, the door of which was open. It was a large room, 
with a great window; and behind a desk, sat two old gentlemen 
with powdered heads, one of whom was reading the newspaper, 
while the other was perusing, with the aid of a pair of tortoise- 
shell spectacles, a small piece of parchment which lay before him. 
Mr Limbkins was standing in front of the desk on one side; and 
Mr Gamfield, with a partially w^ashed face, on the other; while 
two or three bluff-looking men, in top-boots, were lounging 
about. 

The old gentleman with the spectacles gradually dozed off 
over the little bit of parchment; and there was a short pause, after 
Nasir had been stationed by Mr Bumble in front of the desk. 

‘This is the boy, your worship,’ said Mr Bumble. 

The old gentleman who was reading the newspaper raised his 
head for a moment, and pulled the other old gentleman by the 
sleeve; whereupon, the last-mentioned old gentleman woke up. 

‘Oh, is this the boy.^’ said the old gentleman. 

‘This is him, sir,’ replied Mr Bumble. ‘Bow to the magistrate, 
my dear,’ 

Nasir roused himself, and made his best obeisance. He had 
been wondering, with his eyes fixed on the magistrates’ powder, 
whether all boards were bom with that white stuff on their h<ids, 
and were boards from thenceforth on that account. 



Nasir TWIST 


‘Well/ said the old gentlematij ‘I suppose he’s fond of chimney- 
-sweeping?’ 

‘He doats on it, your worship/ replied Bumble; giving Nasir a 
sly pinch, to intimate that he had better not say he didn’t. 

‘And he will be a sweep, will he?’ inquired the old gentleman. 

‘If we was to bind him to any other trade tomorrow, he’d run 
away simultaneous, your worship,’ replied Bumble. 

‘And this man that’s to be his master - you, sir - you’ll treat 
him well, and feed him, and do all that sort of thing, - will you?’ 
said the old gentleman. 

‘ When I says I will, I means I will,’ replied Mr Gamfield dog- 
gedly. 

‘You’re a rough speaker, my friend, but you look an honest, 
open-hearted man,’ said the old gentleman: turning his spectacles 
in the direction of the candidate for Nasir’s premium, whose 
villanous countenance was a regular stamped receipt for cruelty. 
But the magistrate was half blind and half childish, so he couldn’t 
reasonably be expected to discern what other people did. 

‘ I hope I am, sir,’ said Mr Gamfield, with an ugly leer. 

‘I have no doubt you are, my friend,’ replied the old gentleman, 
fixing his spectacles more firmly on his nose, and looking about 
him for the inkstand. 

It was the critical moment of Nasir’s fate. If the inkstand had 
been where the old gentleman thought it was, he would have 
dipped his pen into it, and signed the indentures, and Nasir would 
have been straightway hurried off. But, as it chanced to be immedi- 
ately under his nose, it followed, as a matter of course, that he 
looked all over his desk for it, without finding it; and happening in 
the course of his search to look straight before him, his gaze en- 
countered the pale and terrified face of Nasir Twist: who, despite 
all the admonitory looks and pinches of Bumble, was regarding the 
repulsive countenance of his future master with a mingled expres- 
sion of horror and fear, too palpable to be mistaken, even by a half- 
blind magistrate. 

The old gentleman stopped, laid down his pen, and looked 
from Nasir to Mr Limbkins; who attempted to take snuff with a 
cheerful and unconcerned aspect. 

‘My boy!’ said the old gentleman, leaning over the desk. Nasir 
started at the sound. He might be excused for doing so, for the 

^5 



Nasir TWIST 


words were kindly said, and strange sounds frighten one. He 
trembled violently, and burst into tears. 

‘My boy!’ said the old gentleman, ‘you look pale and alarmed. 
What is the matter.^’ 

‘Stand a little away from him, Beadle,’ said the other magistrate, 
laying aside the paper, and leaning forward with an expression of 
interest. ‘Now, boy, tell us what’s the matter: don’t be afraid.’ 

Nasir fell on his knees, and clasping his hands together, prayed 
that they would order him back to the dark room - that they would 
starve him ~ beat him - kill him if they pleased - rather than send 
him away with that dreadful man. 

‘Well!’ said Mr Bumble, raising his hands and eyes with most 
impressive solemnity, ‘Well! of all the artful and designing 
orphans that ever I see, Nasir, you are one of the most bare- 
facedest.’ 

‘Hold your tongue. Beadle,’ said the second old gentleman, 
when Mr Bumble had given vent to this compound adjective. 

‘I beg your worship’s pardon,’ said Mr Bumble, incredulous of 
his having heard aright. ‘Did your worship speak to me?’ 

‘Yes. Hold your tongue.’ 

Mr Bumble was stupefied with astonishment. A beadle ordered 
to hold his tongue! A moral revolution! 

The old gentleman in the tortoise-shell spectacles looked at his 
companion; he nodded significantly. 

‘We refuse to sanction these indentures,’ said the old gentleman, 
tossing aside the piece of parchment as he spoke. 

‘I hope,’ stammered Mr Limbkins; ‘I hope the magistrates will 
not form the opinion that the authorities have been guilty of any 
improper conduct, on the unsupported testimony of a mere child.’ 

‘The magistrates are not called upon to pronounce any opinion 
on the matter,’ said the second old gentleman sharply. ‘Take the 
boy back to the workhouse, and treat him kindly. He seems to 
want it.’ 

That same evening, the gentleman in the white waistcoat most 
positively and decidedly affirmed, not only that Nasir would be 
hung, but that he would be drawn and quartered into the bargain, 
Mr Bumble shook his head with gloomy mystery, and said he 
wished he might come to good; whereunto Mr Gamfield replied, 
that he wished he might come to him; which, although he agreed 

66 





Nasir TWIST 


with the beadle in most matters, would seem to be a wish of a 
totally opposite description. 

The next morning, the public were once more informed that 
Nasir Twist was again To Let, and that five pounds would be paid 
to anybody who would take possession of him. 


CHAPTER 4 

Nasir i being offered another Place, makes his first Entry into 
Public Life 


In great families, when an advantageous place cannot be obtained, 
either in possession, reversion, remainder, or expectancy, for the 
young man who is growing up, it is a very general custom to send 
him to sea. The board, in imitation of so wise and salutary an 
example, took counsel together on the expediency of shipping off 
Nasir Twist, in some small trading vessel bound to a good un- 
healthy port. This suggested itself as the very best thing that could 
possibly be done with him: the probability being, that the skipper 
would flog him to death, in a playful mood, some day after dinner, 
or would knock his brains out with an iron bar; both pastimes 
being, as is pretty generally known, very favourite and common 
recreations among gentlemen of that class. The more the case pre- 
sented itself to the board, in this point of view, the more manifold 
the advantages of the step appeared; so, they came to the con- 
clusion that the only way of providing for Nasir effectually, was 
to send him to sea without delay. 

Mr Bumble had been dispatched to make various preliminary 
inquiries, with the view of finding out some captain or other who 
wanted a cabin-boy without any friends; and was returning to the 
workhouse to communicate the result of his mission; when he en- 
countered at the gate, no less a person than Mr Sowerberry, the 
parochial undertaker. 

Mr Sowerberry was a tall, gaunt, large-jointed man, attired in 
a suit of threadbare black, with darned cotton stockings of the 
same colour, and shoes to answer. His features were not naturally 



Nasir TWIST 


intended to wear a smiling aspect, but he was iii general rather 
^iven to professional jocosity. His step was elastic, and his face 
betokened inward pleasantry, as he advanced to Mr Bumble, and 
shook him cordially by the hand. 

‘I have taken the measure of the two women that died last night, 
Mr Bumble,’ said the undertaker. 

‘You’ll make your fortune, Mr Sowerberry,’ said the beadle, 
as he thrust his thumb and forefinger into the proffered snuff- 
box of the undertaker, which was an ingenious little model of a 
patent coffin. ‘I say you’ll make your fortune, Mr Sowerberry,’ 
repeated Mr Bumble, tapping the undertaker on the shoulder, in a 
friendly manner, with his cane. 

‘Think so.?'’ said the imdertaker in a tone which half admitted 
and half disputed the probability of the event. ‘The prices allowed 
by the board are very small, Mr Bumble.’ 

‘ So are the coffins,’ replied the beadle, with precisely as near an 
approach to a laugh as a great official ought to indulge in. 

Mr Sowerberry was much tickled at this, as of course he ought 
to be, and laughed a long time without cessation. ‘Well, well, Mr 
Bumble,’ he said at length, ‘there’s no denying that, since the new 
system of feeding has come in, the coffins are something narrower 
and more shallow than they used to be; but we must have some 
profit, Mr Bumble. Well-seasoned timber is an expensive article, 
sir; and all the iron handles come, by canal, from Birmingham.’ 

‘Well, well,’ said Mr Bumble, ‘every trade has its drawbacks. A 
fair profit is, of course, allowable.’ 

‘Of course, of course,’ replied the undertaker; ‘and if I don’t 
get a profit upon this or that particular article, why, I make it up 
in the long-run, you see - he! he! he! ’ 

‘Just so,’ said Mr Bumble. 

‘Though I must say,’ continued the undertaker, resuming the 
current of observations which the beadle had interrupted: ‘though 
I must say, Mr Bumble, that I have to contend against one very 
great disadvantage: which is, that all the stout people go off the 
quickest. The people who have been better off, and have paid rates 
for many years, are the first to sink when they come into the house; 
and let me tell you, Mr Bumble, that three or four inches over one’s 
calculation makes a great hole in one’s profits, especially when one 
has a family to provide for, sir.’ 

<59 



Nasir TWIST 


As Mr Sowerberry said this, with the becoming indignation 
of an ill-used man, and as Mr Bumble felt that it rather tended te^^ 
convey a reflection on the honour of the parish, the latter gentle- 
man thought it advisable to change the subject. Nasir Twist 
being uppermost in his mind, he made him his theme. 

‘By the bye,’ said Mr Bumble, ‘you don’t know anybody 
who wants a boy, do you.^ A porochial ’prentis, who is at present a 
deadweight; a millstone, as I may say; round the porochial throat.^ 
Liberal terms, Mr Sowerberry, liberal terms!’ As Mr Bumble 
spoke, he raised his cane to the bill above him, and gave three 
distinct raps upon the words ‘five pounds:’ which were printed 
thereon in Roman capitals of a gigantic size. 

‘Gadsol’ said the undertaker, taking Mr Bumble by the gilt- 
edged lappel of his official coat; ‘that’s just die very thing I wanted 
to speak to you about. You know - dear me, what a very elegant 
button this is, Mr Bumble! I never noticed it before.’ 

‘Yes, I think it is rather pretty,’ said the beadle, glancing proudly 
downwards at the large brass buttons which embellished his coat. 
‘The die is the same as the porochial seal - the Good Samaritan 
healing the sick and bruised man. The board presented it to me on 
New-year’s morning, Mr Sowerberry. I put it on, I remember, for 
the first time, to attend the inquest on that reduced tradesman, 
who died in a doorway at midnight.’ 

*I recollect,’ said the undertaker. ‘The jury brought in, 
“Died from exposure to the cold, and want of the common neces- 
saries of life”, didn’t they.^’ 

Mr Bumble nodded. 

‘And they made it a special verdict, I think,’ said the under- 
taker, ‘by adding some words to the effect, that if the relieving 
officer had -’ 

‘Tush! Foolery!’ interposed the beadle angrily. ‘If the board 
attended to all the nonsense that ignorant jurymen talk, they’d 
have enough to do.’ 

‘Very true,’ said the undertaker; ‘they would indeed.’ 

‘Juries,’ said Mr Bumble, grasping his cane tightly, as was his 
wont when working into a passion: ‘juries is ineddicated, vulgar, 
grovelling wretches.’ 

‘So they are,’ said the undertaker. 

‘They haven’t no more philosophy nor political economy 


70 



Nasir TWIST 


about ’em than that/ said the beadle, snapping his fingers 
contemptuously. 

‘No more they have,’ acquiesced the undertaker. 

‘I despise ’em,’ said the beadle, growing very red in the face. 

‘So do I,’ rejoined the undertaker. 

‘And I only wish we’d a jury of the independent sort, in the 
house for a week or two,’ said the beadle; ‘the rules and regulations 
of the board would soon bring their spirit down for ’em.’ 

‘Let ’em alone for that,’ replied the undertaker. So saying, 
he smiled, approvingly: to calm the lising wrath of the indignant 
parish officer. 

Mr Bumble lifted off his cocked hat; took a handkerchief from 
the inside of the crown; wiped from his forehead the perspiration 
which his rage had engendered; fixed the cocked hat on again; 
and, turning to the undertaker, said in a calmer voice: 

‘Well; what about the boy.^’ 

*Oh!’ replied the undertaker; ‘why, you know, Mr Bumble, 
I pay a good deal towards the poor’s rates.’ 

‘Hem!’ said Mr Bumble. ‘Well.?^’ 

‘Well,’ replied the undertaker, ‘I was thinking that if I pay 
so much towards ’em, I’ve a right to get as much out of ’em as 
I can, Mr Bumble; and so - and so - 1 think I’ll take the boy myself.’ 

Mr Bumble grasped the undertaker by the arm, and led him 
into the building. Mr Sowerberry was closeted with the board for 
five minutes; and it was arranged that Nasir should go to him that 
evening ‘upon liking’ - a phrase which means, in the case of a 
parish apprentice, that if the master find, upon a short trial, that he 
can get enough work out of a boy without putting too much food 
into him, he shall have him for a term of years, to do what he likes 
with. 

When little Nasir was taken before ‘the gentlemen’ that 
evening, and informed that he was to go, that night, as general 
house-lad to a coffin-maker’s; and that if he complained of his 
situation, or ever came back to the parish again, he would be sent 
to sea, there to be drowned, or knocked on the head, as the case 
might be, he evinced so little emotion, that they by common con- 
sent pronounced him a hardened young rascal, and ordered Mr 
Bumble to remove him forthwith. 

Now, although it was very natural that the board, of all people 

71 



Nasir TWIST 


in the world, should feel in a great state of virtuous astonishment 
and horror at the smallest tokens of want of feeling on the part of^^ 
anybody, they were rather out, in this particular instance. The 
simple fkct was, that Nasir, instead of possessing too little feeling, 
possessed rather too much; and was in a fair way of being reduced, 
for life, to a state of brutal stupidity and sullenness by the ill-usage 
he had received. He heard the news of his destination, in perfect 
silence; and, having had his luggage put into his hand - which was 
not very difficult to carry, inasmuch as it was all comprised within 
tlie limits of a brown paper parcel, about half a foot square by three 
inches deep - he pulled his cap over his eyes; and once more 
attaching himself to Mr Bumble’s coat cuff, was led away by that 
dignitary to a new scene of suffering. 

For some time, Mr Bumble drew Nasir along, without notice or 
remark; for the beadle carried his head very erect, as a beadle 
always should: and, it being a windy day, little Nasir was com- 
pletely enshrouded by the skirts of Mr Bumble’s coat as they blew 
open, and disclosed to great advantage his flapped waistcoat and 
drab plush knee-breeches. As they drew near to their destination, 
however, Mr Bumble thought it expedient to look down, and see 
that the boy was in good order for inspection by his new master: 
which he accordingly did, with a fit and becoming air of gracious 
patronage. 

* Nasir! ’ said Mr Bumble. 

‘Yes, sir,’ replied Nasir, in a low, tremulous voice. 

‘Pull that cap off your eyes, and hold up your head, sir.’ 

Although Nasir did as he was desired, at once; and passed 
the back of his unoccupied hand briskly across his eyes, he left 
a tear in them when he looked up at his conductor. As Mr Bumble 
gazed sternly upon him, it rolled down his cheek. It was followed 
by another, and another. The child made a strong effort, but it was 
an unsuccessful one. Withdrawing his other hand from Mr 
Bumble’s, he covered his face with both; and wept until the tears 
sprung out from between his thin and bony fingers. 

‘Well!’ exclaimed Mr Bumble, stopping short, and darting at 
his little charge a look of intense malignity. ‘Well! Of all the 
ungratefullest, and worst-disposed boys as ever I see, Nasir, you 
are the 

‘No, no, sir,’ sobbed Nasir, clinging to the hand which held 


72 



Nasir TWIST 


the well-known cane; ‘no, no, sir; I will be good indeed; indeed, 
^ndeed I will, sir! I am a very little boy, sir; and it is so - so 

‘So what?* inquired Mr Bumble in amazement. 

‘So lonely, sir! So very lonely!* cried the child. ‘Everybody 
hates me. Oh! sir, don’t, don’t pray be cross to me!’ The child 
beat his hand upon his heart; and looked in his companion’s face, 
with tears of real agony. 

Mr Bumble regarded Nasir’s piteous and helpless look with 
some astonishment for a few seconds; hemmed three or four times 
in a husky manner; and, after muttering something about ‘that 
troublesome cough’, bade Nasir dry his eyes and be a good 
boy; and, once more taking his hand, he walked on with him in 
silence. 

The undertaker, who had just put up the shutters of his shop, 
was making some entries in his day-book by the light of a most 
appropriately dismal candle, when Mr Bumble entered. 

‘Aha!’ said the undertaker, looking up from the book, and 
pausing in the middle of a word; ‘is that you, Bumble?’ 

‘No one else, Mr Sowerberry,’ replied the beadle. ‘Here! I’ve 
brought the boy.’ Nasir made a bow. 

‘ Oh! that’s the boy, is it? ’ said the undertaker, raising the candle 
above his head, to get a better view of Nasir. ‘Mrs Sowerberry, 
will you have the goodness to come here a moment, my dear?’ 

Mrs Sowerberry emerged from a little room behind the shop, 
and presented the form of a short, thin, squeezed-up woman, with 
a vixenish countenance. 

‘My dear,’ said Mr Sowerberry, deferentially, ‘this is the boy 
from the workhouse that I told you of.’ Nasir bowed again. 

‘Dear me!’ said the undertaker’s wife, ‘he’s very small.’ 

‘Why, he is rather small,’ replied Mr Bumble, looking at Nasir 
as if It were his fault that he was no bigger; ‘he is small. There’s no 
denying it. But he’ll grow, Mrs Sowerberry — he’ll grow.’ 

‘Ah! I dare say he will,’ replied the lady pettishly, ‘on our 
victuals and our drink. I see no saving in parish children, not I; 
for they always cost more to keep, than they’re worth. However, 
men always think they know best. There! Get down stairs, little 
bag o’ bones.’ With this, the undertaker’s wife opened a side door, 
and pushed Nasir down a steep flight of stairs into a stone cell, 
damp and dark, forming the ante-room of the coal-cellar, and 

73 



Nasir TWIST 

denominated ‘kitchen’, wherein sat a slatternly girl, in shoes down 
at heel, and blue worsted stockings very much out of repair. ^ 

‘Here, Charlotte,’ said Mrs Sowerberry, who had followed 
Nasir down, ‘give this boy some of the cold bits that were put 
by for Trip. He hasn’t come home since the morning, so he may 
go without ’em. I dare say the boy isn’t too dainty to eat ’em, ~ are 
you, boy?’ 

Nasir, whose eyes had glistened at the mention of meat, and 
who was trembling with eagerness to devour it, replied in the 
negative; and a plateful of coarse broken victuals was set before 
him. 

I wish some well-fed philosopher, whose meat and drink turn 
to gall within him; whose blood is ice, whose heart is iron; could 
have seen Nasir Twist clutching at the dainty viands that the dog 
had neglected. I wish he could have witnessed the horrible avidity 
with which Nasir tore the bits asunder with all the ferocity of 
famine. There is only one thing I should like better; and that would 
be to see the Philosopher making the same sort of meal himself, 
with the same relish. 

‘Well,’ said the undertaker’s wife, when Nasir had finished 
his supper: which she had regarded in silent horror, and with 
fearful auguries of his future appetite: ‘have you done?’ 

There being nothing eatable within his reach, Nasir replied in 
the affirmative. 

‘Then come with me,’ said Mrs Sowerberry, taking up a dim 
and dirty lamp, and leading the way upstairs; ‘your bed’s under 
the counter. You don’t mind sleeping among the coffins, I suppose? 
But it doesn’t much matter whether you do or don’t, for you can’t 
sleep anywhere else. Come; don’t keep me here all night!’ 

Nasir lingered no longer, but meekly followed his new mistress. 



CHAPTER 5 


Nasir mingles with new Associates. Going to a Funeral for the 
first Titnei he forms an unfavour able Notion of his Master s 
Business 


Nasir, being left to himself in the undertaker’s shop, set the 
lamp down on a workman’s bench, and gazed timidly about him 
with a feeling of awe and dread, which many people a good deal 
older than he, will be at no loss to understand. An unfinished 
coffin on black tressels, which stood in the middle of the shop, 
looked so gloomy and death-like that a cold tremble came over 
him, every time his eyes wandered in the direction of the dismal 
object, from which he almost expected to see some frightful form 
slowly rear its head, to drive him mad with terror. Against the wall 
were ranged, in regular array, a long row of elm boards cut into 
the same shape: looking in the dim light, like high-shouldered 
ghosts with their hands in their breeches-pockets. Coffin-plates, 
elm-chips, bright-headed nails, and shreds of black cloth, lay 
scattered on the floor; and the wall behind die counter was orna- 
mented with a lively' representation of two mutes in very stiff 
neckcloths, on duty at a large private door, with a hearse drawn by 
four black steeds, approaching in the distance. The shop was close 
and hot. Tlie atmosphere seemed tainted widi the smell of coffins. 
The recess beneath the counter in which his flock mattress was 
thrust looked like a grave. 

Nor were these the only dismal feelings which depressed Nasir. 
He was alone in a strange place; and we all know how chilled and 
desolate the best of us will sometimes feel in such a situation. 
The boy had no friends to care for, or to care for him. The regret 
of no recent separation was fresh in his mind; the absence of no 
loved and well-remembered face sank heavily into his heart. But 
his heart was heavy, notwithstanding; and he wished, as he crept 
into his narrow bed, that that were his coffin, and that he could be 
lain in a calm and lasting sleep in the churchyard ground, with the 
tall grass waving gently above his head, and the sound of the old 
deep bell to soothe him in his sleep. 

75 



Nasir TWIST 


Nasir was awakened in the morning, by a loud kicking at the 
outside of the shop-door; which, before he could huddle on hia*- 
clothes, was repeated, in an angry and impetuous manner, about 
twenty-five times. When he began to undo the chain, the legs 
desisted, and a voice began. 

* Open the door, will yer.^ ’ cried the voice which belonged to the 
legs which had kicked at the door. 

‘I will, directly, sir,’ replied Nasir, undoing the chain, and 
turning the key. 

‘I suppose yer the new boy, ain’t yer?’ said the voice through 
the keyhole. 

‘Yes, sir,’ replied Nasir. 

‘How old are yer.'^’ inquired the voice. 

‘Ten, sir,’ replied Nasir. 

‘Then I’ll whop yer when I get in,’ said the voice; ‘you just 
see if I don’t, that’s all, my work’us brat!’ and having made this 
obliging promise, the voice began to whistle. 

Nasir had been too often subjected to the process to which 
the very expressive monosyllable just recorded bears reference, 
to entertain the smallest doubt that the owner of the voice, who- 
ever he might be, would redeem his pledge, most honourably. 
He drew back the bolts with a trembling hand, and opened the door. 

For a second or two, Nasir glanced up the street, and down the 
street, and over the way, impressed with the belief that the un- 
known, who had addressed him through the keyhole, had walked a 
few paces off, to warm himself; for nobody did he see but a big 
chanty-boy,^ sitting on a post in front of the house, eating a slice 
of bread and butter: which he cut into wedges, the size of his 
mouth, with a clasp knife, and then consumed with great dexterity. 

‘I beg your pardon, sir,’ said Nasir at length: seeing that no 
other visitor made his appearance; ‘did you knock .^’ 

‘I kicked,’ replied the charity-boy. 

‘Did you want a coffin, sir.^’ inquired Nasir, innocently. 

At this the charity-boy looked monstrous fierce; and said that 
Nasir would stand in need of one before long, if he cut jokes with 
his superiors in that way. 

‘Yer don’t know who I am, I suppose, Work’us.^’ said the 
charity-boy, in continuation: descending from the top of the post, 
meanwhile, with edifying gravity. 

76 



Nasir TWIST 


‘No, sir,’ rejoined Nasir. 

‘Tm Mister Noah Claypole,’ said the charity-boy, ‘and you’re 
under me. Take down the shutters, yer idle young ruffian! ’ With 
this, Mr Claypole administered a kick to Nasir, and entered the 
shop with a dignified air, which did him great credit. It is difficult 
for a large-headed, small-eyed youth, of lumbering make and heavy 
countenance, to look dignified under any circumstances; but it is 
more especially so, when superadded to these personal attractions 
are a red nose and yellow smalls. 

Nasir, having taken down the shutters, and broken a pane 
of glass in his efforts to stagger away beneath the weight of the 
first one to a small court at the side of die house in which they 
were kept during the day, was graciously assisted by Noah, who, 
having consoled him with the assurance that ‘he’d catch it’, 
condescended to help him. Mr Sowerberry came down soon after. 
Shortly afterwards, Mrs Sowerberry appeared. Nasir having 
‘caught it’, in fulfilment of Noah’s prediction, followed that young 
gentleman down the stairs to breakfast. 

‘ Come near the fire, Noah,’ said Charlotte. ‘I saved a nice Imle 
bit of bacon for you from master’s breakfast. Nasir, shut that 
door at Mister Noah’s back, and take them bits that I’ve put out on 
the cover of the bread-pan. There’s your tea; take it away to that 
box, and drink it there, and make haste, for they’ll want you to 
mind the shop. D’ye hear.^’ 

‘D’ye hear, Work’us?’ said Noah Claypole. 

‘Lor, Noah!’ said Charlotte, ‘what a rum creature you are! 
Why don’t you let the boy alone 

‘Let him alone!’ said Noah. ‘Why everybody lets him alone 
enough, for the matter of that. Neither his father nor his mother 
will ever interfere with him. All his relations let him have his own 
way pretty well. Eh, Charlotte.^ He! he! he!* 

‘Oh, you queer soul!* said Charlotte, bursting into a hearty 
, laugh, in which she was joined by Noah; after which they both 
I looked scornfully at poor Nasir Twist, as he sat shivering on the 
box in the coldest corner of the room, and ate the stale pieces which 
had been specially reserved for him. 

Noah was a charity-boy, but not a workhouse orphan. No 
chance-child was he, for he could trace his genealogy all the 
way back to his parents, who lived hard by; liis mother being 


77 



Nasir TWIST 


a washerwoman, and his father a drunken soldier, discharged 
with a wooden leg, and a diurnal pension of twopence-halfpennv^ 
and an unstateable fraction. The shop-boys in the neighbour- 
hood had long been in the habit of branding Noah, in the public 
streets, with the ignominous epithets of ‘leathers’, ‘charity’, and 
the like; and Noah had borne them without reply. But, now that 
fortune had cast in his way a nameless orphan, at whom even the 
meanest could point the finger of scorn, he retorted on him with 
interest. This affords charming food for contemplation. It shows us 
what a beautiful thing human nature may be made to be; and how 
impartially the same amiable qualities are developed in the finest 
lord and the dirtiest charity-boy. 

Nasir had been sojourning at the undertaker’s some three 
weeks or a month- Mr and Mrs Sowerberry - the shop being shut 
up - were taking their supper in the little back-parlour, when Mr 
Sowerberry, after several deferential glances at his wife, said, 

‘My dear He was going to say more; but, Mrs Sowerberry 
looking up, with a peculiarly unpropitious aspect, he stopped short. 

‘Well,’ said Mrs Sowerberry, sharply. 

‘Nothing, my dear, nothing,’ said Mr Sowerberry. 

‘Ugh, you brute!’ said Mrs Sowerberry. 

‘Not at all, my dear,’ said Mr Sowerberry humbly. ‘I thought 
you didn’t want to hear, my dear- 1 was only going to say 

‘ Oh, don’t tell me what you were going to say,’ interposed Mrs 
Sowerberry. ‘I am nobody; don’t consult me, pray, /don’t want to 
intrude upon your secrets.’ As Mrs Sowerberry said this, she gave 
an hysterical laugh, which threatened violent consequences. 

‘But, my dear,’ said Sowerberry, ‘I want to ask your advice.’ 

‘ No, no, don’t ask mine,’ replied Mrs Sowerberry, in an affecting 
manner: ‘ask somebody else’s.’ Here, there was another hysterical 
laugh, which frightened Mr Sowerberry very much. This is a very 
common and much-approved matrimonial course of treatment, 
which is often very effective. It at once reduced Mr Sowerberry to^ 
begging, as a special favour, to be allowed to say what Mrs Sower- 
berry was most curious to hear. After a short altercation of less 
than three quarters of an hour’s duration, the permission was most 
graciously conceded. 

‘It’s only about young Twist, my dear,’ said Mr Sowerberry. 
‘A very-good-looking boy, that, my dear.’ 

78 



Nasir TWIST 


‘He need be, for he eats enough/ observed the lady. 

‘There’s an expression of melancholy in his face, my dear,’ 
resumed Mr Sowerberry, ‘which is very interesting. He would 
make a delightful mute, my love.’ 

Mrs Sowerberry looked up with an expression of consider- 
able wonderment. Mr Sowerberry remarked it; and, without 
allowing time for any observation on the good lady’s part, pro- 
ceeded. 

‘I don’t mean a regular mute to attend grown-up people, my 
dear, but only for children’s practice. It would be veiy new to have 
a mute in proportion, my dear. You may depend upon it, it would 
have a superb effect.’ 

Mrs Sowerberry, who had a good deal of taste in the under- 
taking way, was much struck by the novelty of this idea; but, 
as it would have been compromising her dignity to have said 
so, under existing circumstances, she merely inquired, with much 
sharpness, why such an obvious suggestion had not presented 
itself to her husband’s mind before.^ Mr Sowerberry rightly con- 
strued this, as an acquiescence in his proposition; it was speedily 
determined, therefore, that Nasir should be at once initiated into 
the mysteries of the profession; and, with this view, that he should 
accompany his master on the very next occasion of his services 
being required. 

The occasion was not long in coming. Half an hour after break- 
fast next morning, Mr Bumble entered the shop; and supporting 
his cane against the counter, drew forth his large leathern pocket- 
book, from which he selected a small scrap of paper, which he 
handed over to Sowerberry. 

‘Aha!’ said the undertaker, glancing over it with a lively 
countenance; ‘an order for a coffin, eh.^’ 

‘For a coffin first, and a porochial funeral afterwards,’ replied 
Mr Bumble, fastening the strap of the leathern pocket-book: which, 
like himself, was very corpulent. 

‘^Bayton,’ said the undertaker, looking from the scrap of paper 
to Mr Bumble. ‘I never heard the name before.’ 

Bumble shook his head, as he replied, ‘Obstinate people, Mr 
Sowerberry; very obstinate. Proud, too, I’m afraid, sir.’ 

‘Proud, eh.^’ exclaimed Mr Sowerberry with a sneer. ‘Come, 
that’s too much.’ 


79 



Nasir TWIST 


‘Oh, it’s sickening/ replied the beadle. ‘Antimonial/ Mr 
Sowerberry 1 * 

‘ So it is/ acquiesced the undertaker. 

‘We only heard of the family the night before last/ said the 
beadle; ‘and we shouldn’t have known anything about them, then, 
only a woman who lodg^ in the same house made an application 
to the porochial committee for them to send the porochial surgeon 
to see a woman as was very bad. He had gone out to dinner; but 
his ’prentice (which is a very clever lad) sent ’em some medicine 
in a blacking-bottle, off-hand,’ 

‘Ah, there’s promptness,’ said the undertaker. 

‘Promptness, indeed!’ replied the beadle. ‘But what’s the con- 
sequence; what’s the ungrateful behaviour of these rebels, sir.^ 
Why, the husband sends back word that the medicine won’t suit 
his wife’s complaint, and so she shan’t take it - says she shan’t 
take it, sir! Good, strong, wholesome medicine, as was given with 
great success to two Irish labourers and a coalheaver, only a week 
before - sent ’em for nothing, with a blackm’-bottle in, ~ and he 
sends back word that she shan’t take it, sir! ’ 

As the flagrant atrocity presented itself to Mr Bumble’s mind in 
full force, he struck the counter sharply with his cane, and became 
flushed with indignation, 

‘Well,’ said the undertaker, ‘I ne- ver - did -’ 

‘Never did, sir!’ ejaculated the beadle. ‘No, nor nobody never 
did; but, now she’s dead, we’ve got to bury her; and that’s the 
direction; and the sooner it’s done, the better.’ 

Thus saying, Mr Bumble put on his cocked hat wrong side first, 
in a fever of parochial excitement; and flounced out of the shop, 
‘Why, he was so angry, Nasir, that he forgot even to ask after 
you!’ said Mr Sowerberry, looking after the beadle as he strode 
down the street. 

‘Yes, sir,’ replied Nasir, who had carefully kept himself out of 
sight, during the interview; and who was shaking from head to 
foot at the mere recollection of the sound of Mr Bumble’s voice. 
He needn’t have taken the trouble to shnnk from Mr Bumble’s 
glance, however; for that functionary, on whom the prediction 
of the gentleman in the white waistcoat had made a very strong 
impression, thought that now the undertaker had got Nasir upon 
trial, the subject was better avoided, until such time as he should be 

8o 



Nasir TWIST 


firmly bound for seven years, and all danger of his being returned 
,^pon the hands of the parish should be thus effectually and legally 
overcome. 

‘Well,’ said Mr Sowerberry, taking up his hat, ‘the sooner 
this job is done, the better. Noah, look after the shop. Nasir, put 
on your cap, and come with me.’ Nasir obeyed, and followed his 
master on his professional mission. 

They walked on, for some time, through the most crowded and 
densely inhabited part of the town; and then, striking down a 
narrow street more dirty and miserable than any they had yet 
passed through, paused to look for the house which was the object 
of their search. The houses on either side were high and large, but 
very old, and tenanted by people of the poorest class: as their 
neglected appearance would have sufficiently denoted, without the 
concurrent testimony afforded by the squalid looks of the few men 
and women who, with folded arms and bodies half doubled, 
occasionally skulked along. A great many of the tenements had 
shop-fronts; but they were fast closed, and mouldering away; 
only the upper rooms being inhabited. Some houses which had 
become insecure from age and decay, were prevented from fall- 
ing into the street, by huge beams of wood reared against the 
walls, and firmly planted in the road; but even these crazy dens 
seemed to have been selected as the nightly haunts of some house- 
less wretches, for many of the rough boards which supplied the 
place of door and window, were wrenched from their positions, to 
afford an aperture wide enough for the passage of a human body. 
The kenneP was stagnant and filthy. The very rats, which here 
and there lay putrefying in its rottenness, were hideous with famine. 

There was neither knocker nor bell-handle at the open door 
where Nasir and his master stopped; so, groping his way 
cautiously through the dark passage, and bidding Nasir keep 
close to him and not be afraid, the undertaker mounted to the 
^ top of the first flight of stairs. Stumbling against a door on the 
. landing, he rapped at it with his knuckles. 

It was opened by a young girl of thirteen or fourteen. The under- 
taker at once saw enough of what the room contained, to know it 
was the apartment to which he had been directed. He stepped in; 
Nasir followed him. 

There was no fire in the room; but a man was crouching 

8i 



Nasir TWIST 


mechanically over the empty stove. An old woman, too, had 
drawn a low stool to the cold hearth, and was sitting beside hiniv^ 
There were some ragged children m another corner; and in a 
small recess, opposite the door, there lay upon the ground, some- 
thing covered with an old blanket. Nasir shuddered as he cast his 
eyes towards the place, and crept involuntarily closer to his master, 
for though it was covered up, the boy felt that it was a corpse. 

The man’s face was thin and very pale; his hair and beard were 
giizzly; his eyes were bloodshot. The old woman’s face was 
wrinkled; her two remaining teeth protruded over her underlip; 
and her eyes were bright and piercing. Nasir was afraid to look at 
either her or the man. They seemed so like the rats he had seen 
outside. 

‘Nobody shall go near her,’ said the man, starting fieicely up, 
as the undertaker approached the recess. ‘Keep back! Damn you, 
keep back, if you’ve a life to lose! ’ 

‘Nonsense, my good man,’ said the undertaker, who was pretty 
well used to misery in all its shapes. ‘Nonsense!’ 

‘I tell you,’ said the man: clenching his hands, and stamping 
furiously on the door, - ‘I tell you I won’t have her put into the 
ground. She couldn’t rest there. The worms would worry her - not 
eat her - she is so worn away.’ 

The undertaker offered no reply to this raving; but producing a 
tape from his pocket, knelt down for a moment by the side of the 
body. 

‘Ah!’ said the man, bursting into tears, and sinking on his 
knees at the feet of the dead woman; ‘kneel down, kneel down - 
kneel round her, every one of you, and mark my words! I say she 
was starved to death. I never knew how bad she was, till the fever 
came upon her; and then her bones were starting through the skin. 
There was neither fire nor candle; she died in the dark - in the 
dark! She couldn’t even see her children’s faces, though we heard 
her gasping out their names. I begged for her in the streets: and 
they sent me to prison. Wlien I came back, she was dying; and all 
the blood in my heart has dried up, for they starved her to death. 

I swear it before the God that saw it! They starved her! ’ He twined 
his hands in his hair; and, with a loud scream, rolled grovelling 
upon the floor, his eyes fixed, and the foam covering his lips. 

The terrified children cried bitterly; but the old woman, who 

82 



Nasir TWIST 


had hitherto remained as quiet as if she had been wholly deaf to all 
^hat passed, menaced them into silence. Having unloosed the 
cravat of the man who still remained extended on the ground, she 
tottered towards the undertaker. 

‘She was my daughter,’ said the old woman, nodding her head 
in the direction of the corpse; and speaking with an idiotic leer, 
more ghastly than even the presence of death in such a place. 
‘Lord, Lord! Well it is strange that I who gave birth to her, and 
was a woman then, should be alive and merry now, and she l5dng 
there so cold and stiff! Lord, Lord! - to think of it; it’s as good as a 
play - as good as a play! ’ 

As the wretched creature mumbled and chuckled in her hideous 
merriment, the undertaker turned to go away. 

‘Stop, stop!’ said the old woman in a loud whisper. ‘Will she 
be buried tomorrow, or next day, or tonight.^ I laid her out; and 
I must walk, you know. Send me a large cloak: a good warm one: 
for it is bitter cold. We should have cake and wine, too, before we 
go! Never mind; send some bread - only a loaf of bread and a cup 
of water. Shall we have some bread, dear?’ she said eagerly: 
catching at the undertaker’s coat, as he once more moved towards 
the door. 

‘Yes, yes,’ said the undertaker, ‘of course. Anything you like!’ 
He disengaged himself from the old woman’s grasp; and, drawing 
Nasir after him, hurried away. 

The next day, (the family having been meanwhile relieved 
with a half-quartern loaf and a piece of cheese, left with them by 
Mr Bumble himself,) Nasir and his master returned to the miser- 
able abode, where Mr Bumble had already arrived, accompanied 
by four men from the workhouse, who were to act as bearers. An 
old black cloak had been thrown over the rags of the old woman 
and the man; and the bare coffin having been screwed down, was 
hoisted on the shoulders of the bearers, and carried into the 
street, 

‘Now, you must put your best leg foremost, old lady!’ whis- 
pered Sowerberry in the old woman’s ear; ‘we are rather late; 
and it won’t do, to keep the clergjonan waiting. Move on, my men, 
- as quick as you like! ’ 

Thus directed, the bearers trott-ed^on under their light burden; 
and the two mourners kept as near them, as they could. Mr Bumble 

83 



Nasir TWIST 


and Sowerberry walked at a good smart pace in front; and Nasir, 
whose legs were not so long as his master’s, ran by the side. 

There was not so great a necessity for hurrying as Mr Sower- 
berry had anticipated, however; for when they reached the obscure 
corner of the churchyard in which the nettles grew, and where the 
parish graves were made, the clergyman had not arrived; and the 
clerk, who was sitting by the vestry-room fire, seemed to think it 
by no means improbable that it might be an hour or so, before he 
came. So, they put the bier on the brink of the grave; and the two 
mourners waited patiently in the damp clay, with a cold rain 
drizzling down, while the ragged boys whom the spectacle had 
attracted into the churchyard played a noisy game at hide-and-seek 
among the tombstones, or varied their amusements by jumping 
backwards and forwards over the coffin. Mr Sowerberry and 
Bumble, being personal friends of the clerk, sat by the fire with him, 
and read the paper. 

At length, after a lapse of something more than an hour, Mr 
Bumble, and Sowerberry, and the clerk, were seen running to- 
wards the grave. Immediately afterwards, the clergyman appeared, 
putting on his surplice as he came along. Mr Bumble then thrashed 
a boy or two, to keep up appearances; and the reverend gentle- 
man, having read as much of the burial service as could be com- 
pressed into four minutes, gave his surplice to the clerk, and walked 
away again. 

‘Now, Billl’ said Sowerberry to the grave-digger. ‘Fill up!’ 

It was no very difficult task; for the grave was so full, that 
the uppermost coffin was within a few feet of the surface. The 
grave-digger shovelled in the earth, stamped it loosely down with 
his feet, shouldered his spade, and walked off, followed by the 
boys, who murmured very loud complaints at the fun being over 
so soon. 

‘Come, my good fellow!’ said Bumble, tapping the man on the 
back. ‘They want to shut up the yard,’ 

The man, who had never once moved, since he had taken his 
station by the grave-side, started, raised his head, stared at the 
person who had addressed him, walked forward for a few paces, 
and fell down in a swoon. The crazy old woman was too much 
occupied in bewailing the loss of her cloak (which the under- 
taker had taken off), to pay him any attention; so they threw a can^.>. 

84 "" 



Nasir TWIST 


of cold water over him; and when he came to, saw him safely out 
^f the churchyard, locked the gate, and departed on their different 
ways. 

‘Well, Nasir,’ said Sowerberry, as they walked home, ‘how 
do you like it.^’ 

‘ Pretty well, thank you, sir,’ replied Nasir, with considerable 
hesitation. ‘ Not very much, sir.’ 

‘Ah, you’ll get used to it in time, Nasir,’ said Sowerberry. 
‘Nothing when you are used to it, my boy.’ 

Nasir wondered, in his own mind, whether it had taken a 
very long time to get Mr Sowerberry used to it. But he thought it 
better not to ask the question, and walked back to the shop, 
thinking over all he had seen and heard. 


CHAPTER 6 

Nasir^ being goaded by the Taunts of Noah, rouses into Action, 
and rather astonishes him 


The month’s trial over, Nasir was formally apprenticed. It was 
a nice sickly season just at this time. In commercial phrase, cofEns 
were looking up; and, in the course of a few weeks, Nasir acquired 
a great deal of experience. The success of Mr Sowerberry’s in- 
genious speculation, exceeded even his most sanguine hopes. The 
oldest inhabitants recollected no period at which measles had been 
so prevalent, or so fatal to infant existence; and many were the 
mournful processions which little Nasir headed, in a hat-band 
reaching down to his knees, to the indescribable admiration and 
emotion of all the mothers in the town. As Nasir accompanied his 
master in most of his adult expeditions, too, in order that he might 
acquire that equanimity of demeanour and full command of nerve 
which are so essential to a finished undertaker, he had many 
opportunities of observing the beautiful resignation and fortitude 
with which some strong-minded people bear their trials and 
losses. 

For instance; when Sowerberry had an order for the burial 

85 



Nasir TWIST 


of some rich old lady or gentleman, who was surrounded by a 
great number of nephews and nieces, who had been perfectl}^^ 
inconsolable during the previous illness, and whose grief had 
been wholly irrepressible even on the most public occasions, they 
would be as happy among themselves as need be - quite cheerful 
and contented - conversing together with as much freedom and 
gaiety, as if nothing whatever had happened to disturb them. 
Husbands, too, bore the loss of their wives with the most heroic 
calmness. Wives, again, put on weeds for their husbands, as if, so 
far from grieving in the garb of sorrow, they had made up their 
minds to render it as becoming and attractive as possible. It was 
observable, too, that ladies and gentlemen who were in passions of 
anguish during the ceremony of interment, recovered almost as 
soon as they reached home, and became quite composed before the 
tea-drinking was over. All this was very pleasant and improving to 
see; and Nasir beheld it with great admiration. 

That Nasir Twist was moved to resignation by the example 
of these good people, I cannot, although I am his biographer, 
undertake to affirm with any degree of confidence; but I can 
most distinctly say, that for many months he continued meekly 
to submit to the domination and ill-treatment of Noah Claypole: 
who used him far worse than before, now that his jealousy was 
roused by seeing the new boy promoted to the black stick and 
hat-band, while he, the old one, remained stationary in the 
muffin-cap^ and leathers. Charlotte treated him ill, because Noah 
did; and Mrs Sowerberry was his decided enemy, because Mr 
Sowerberry was disposed to be his friend; so, between these three 
on one side, and a glut of funerals on the other, Nasir was not 
altogether as comfortable as the hungry pig was, when he was shut 
up, by mistake, in the grain department of a brewery. 

And now, I come to a very important passage in Nasir’s 
history; for I have to record an act, slight and unimportant perhaps 
in appearance, but which indirectly produced a material change in . 
all his future prospects and proceedings. 

One day, Nasir and Noah had descended into the kitchen at 
the usual dinner-hour, to banquet upon a small joint of mutton - 
a pound and a half of the worst end of the neck - when, Chaffotte 
being called out of the way, there ensued a brief interval of time, 
which Noah Claypole, being hungry and vicious, considered he 

S6 



Nasir TWIST 


could not possibly devote to a worthier purpose than aggravating 
^nd tantalizing young Nasir Twist. 

Intent upon this innocent amusement, Noah put his feet on the 
table-cloth; and pulled Nasir’s hair; and twitched his ears; and 
expressed his opinion that he was a 'sneak;’ and furthermore 
announced his intention of coming to see him hanged, whenever 
that desirable event should take place; and entered upon various 
other topics of petty annoyance, like a malicious and ill-condi- 
tioned charity-boy as he was. But, none of these taunts producing 
the desired effect of making Nasir cry, Noah attempted to be 
more facetious still; and in this attempt, did what many small wits, 
with far greater reputations than Noah, sometimes do to this day, 
when they want to be funny. He got rather personal. 

' Work’us,’ said Noah, ‘how’s your mother.^’ 

‘She’s dead,’ replied Nasir; ‘don’t you say anything about her 
to me! ’ 

Nasir’s colour rose as he said this; he breathed quickly; and 
there was a curious working of the mouth and nostrils, which Mr 
Claypole thought must be the immediate precursor of a violent fit 
of crying. Under this impression, he returned to the charge. 

‘What did she die of, Work’us.^’ said Noah. 

‘Of a broken heart, some of our old nurses told me,’ replied 
Nasir: more as if he were talking to himself, than answering Noah. 
‘I think I know what it must be to die of that!’ 

‘Tol de rol lol lol, right fol lairy, Work’us,’ said Noah, as a 
tear rolled down Nasir’s cheek. ‘What’s set you a snivelling now.^ ’ 

‘Not you^ replied Nasir, hastily brushing the tear away. 
‘Don’t think it.’ 

‘Oh, not me, ehl’ sneered Noah. 

‘No, not you,’ replied Nasir, sharply. ‘There; that’s enough. 
Don’t say anything more to me about her; you’d better not!’ 

‘Better not!’ exclaimed Noah. ‘Well! Better not! Work’us, 
don’t be impudent. Your mother, too! She was a nice ’un, she was. 
f Oh, Lor!’ And here, Noah nodded his head expressively; and 
curled up as much of his small red nose as muscular action could 
collect together, for the occasion. 

‘ Yer know, Work’us,’ continued Noah, emboldened by Nasir’s 
silence, and speaking in a jeering tone of affected pityr of all tones 
tlie most annoying: ‘Yer know, Work’us, it can’t be helped now; 

87 



Nasir TWIST 


and of course yer couldn’t help it then; and I’m very sorry for 
it; and I’m sure we all are, and pity yer very much. But yer must^' 
know, Work’us, yer mother was a regular right-down bad ’un.’ 

‘What did you say.^’ inquired Nasir, looking up very quickly. 

‘A regular right-down bad ’un, Work’us,’ replied Noah, coolly. 
‘And it’s a great deal better, Work’us, that she died when she did, 
or else she’d have been hard labouring in Bridewell,^ or transported, 
or hung; which is more likely than either, isn’t it.^’ 

Crimson with fury, Nasir started up, overthrew the chair and 
table; seized Noah by the throat; shook him, in the violence of his 
\ rage, till his teeth chattered in his head; and, collecting his whole 
force into one heavy blow, felled him to the ground. 

A minute ago, the boy had looked the quiet, mild, dejected 
creature that harsh treatment had made him. But his spirit was 
roused at last; the cruel insult to his dead mother had set his blood 
on fire. His breast heaved; his attitude was erect; his eye bright and 
vivid; his whole person changed, as he stood glaring over the 
cowardly tormentor who now lay crouching at his feet; and defied 
him with an energy he had never known before. 

‘He’ll murder me!’ blubbered Noah. ‘Charlotte! missis! Here’s 
the new boy a murdering of me! Help! help! Nasir’s gone mad! 
Char - lotte!’ 

Noah’s shouts were responded to, by a loud scream from 
Charlotte, and a louder from Mrs Sowerberry; the former of whom 
rushed into the kitchen by a side-door, while the latter paused on 
the staircase till she was quite certain that it was consistent with the 
preservation of human life, to come farther down. 

‘Oh, you little wretch!’ screamed Charlotte, seizing Nasir 
with her utmost force, which was about equal to that of a moder- 
ately strong man in particularly good training, ‘Oh, you little 
un-grate-ful, mur-de-rous, hor-rid villain!’ And between every 
syllable, Charlotte gave Nasir a blow with all her might: accom- 
panying it with a scream, for the benefit of society. 

Charlotte’s fist was by no means a light one; but, lest it should 
not be effectual in calming Nasir’s wrath, Mrs Sowerberry 
plunged into the kitchen, and assisted to hold him with one hand, 
while she scratched his face with the other. In this favourable 
position of affairs, Noah rose from the ground, and pommelled 
him behind. 


88 






Nasir TWIST 


This was rather too violent exercise to last long. When they 
were all wearied out, and could tear and beat no longer, they^ 
dragged Nasir, struggling and shouting, but nothing daunted, 
into the dust-cellar, and there locked him up. This being done, 
Mrs Sowerberry sunk into a chair, and burst into tears. 

‘Bless her, she’s going off!’ said Charlotte. ‘A glass of water, 
Noah, dear. Make haste! ’ 

‘Oh! Charlotte,’ said Mrs Sowerberry; speaking as well as she 
could, through a deficiency of breath, and a sufficiency of cold 
water, which Noah had poured over her head and shoulders. ‘ Oh! 
Charlotte, what a mercy we have not all been murdered in our beds! ’ 

‘Ah! mercy indeed, ma’am,’ was the reply. ‘I only hope this’ll 
teach master not to have any more of these dreadful creatures, 
that are born to be murderers and robbers from their very cradle. . 
Poor Noah! He was all but killed, ma’am, when I come in.’ 

‘Poor fellow!’ said Mrs Sowerberry, looking piteously on the 
charity-boy. 

Noah, whose top waistcoat-button might have been some- 
where on a level with the crown of Nasir’s head, rubbed his 
eyes with the inside of his wrists while this commiseration was 
bestowed upon him, and performed some affecting tears and sniffs. 

‘What’s to be done!’ exclaimed Mrs Sowerberry. ‘Your master’s 
not at home, there’s not a man in the house, and he’ll kick that door 
down in ten minutes.’ Nasir’s vigorous plunges against the bit of 
timber in question, rendered this occurrence highly probable. 

‘Dear, dear! I don’t know, ma’am,’ said Charlotte, ‘unless we 
send for the police-officers,’ 

‘ Or the millingtary,’ suggested Mr Claypole. 

‘No, no,’ said Mrs Sowerberry, bethinking herself of Nasir’s 
old friend. ‘Run to Mr Bumble, Noah, and tell him to come here 
directly, and not to lose a minute; never mind your cap! Make 
haste! You can hold a knife to that black eye, as you run along. 
It’ll keep the swelling down.’ 

Noah stopped to make no reply, but started off at his fullest 
speed; and very much it astonished the people who were out walk- 
ing, to see a charity-boy tearing through the streets .pell-mell, with 
no cap on his head, and a clasp-knife at his eye. 



CHAPTER 7 


Nasir continues refractory 


Noah Cl ay pole ran along the streets at his swiftest pace, and 
paused not once for breath, until he reached the workhouse-gate. 
Having rested here, for a minute or so, to collect a good burst of 
sobs and an imposing show of tears and terror, he knocked loudly 
at the wicket; and presented such a rueful face to the aged pauper 
who opened it, that even he, who saw nothing but rueful faces 
about him at the best of times, started back in astonishment. 

‘Why, what’s the matter with the boy!’ said the old pauper. 

‘Mr Bumble! Mr Bumble!’ cried Noah, with well-affected dis- 
may, and in tones so loud and agitated, that they not only caught 
the ear of Mr Bumble himself, who happened to be hard by, but 
alarmed him so much that he rushed into the yard without his 
cocked hat, - which is a very curious and remarkd^le circumstance: 
as showing that even a beadle, acted upon by a sudden and powerful 
impulse, may be afflicted with a momentary visitation of loss of 
self-possession, and forgetfulness of personal dignity. 

‘ Oh, Mr Bumble, sir! ’ said Noah: ‘ Nasir, sir, ~ Nasir has 

‘What? What? ’ interposed Mr Bumble, with a gleam of pleasure 
in his metallic eyes. ‘Not run away; he hasn’t run away, has he, 
Noah?’ 

‘No, sir, no. Not run away, sir, but he’s turned wicious,’ replied 
Noah. ‘He tried to murder me, sir; and then he tried to murder 
Charlotte; and then missis. Oh! what dreadful pain it is! Such 
agony, please, sir!’ And here, Noah writhed and twisted his body 
into an extensive variety of eel-like positions; thereby giving Mr 
Bumble to understand that, from the violent and sanguinary onset 
of Nasir Twist, he had sustained severe internal injury and 
damage, from which he was at that moment suffering the acutest 
torture. 

When Noah saw that the intelligence he communicated perfectly 
paralysed Mr Bumble, he imparted additional effect thereunto, 
by bewailing his dreadful wounds ten times louder than before; 
and when he observed a gentleman in a white waistcoat crossing 

91 



Nasir TWIST 


the yard, he was more tragic in his lamentations than ever: rightly 
conceiving it highly expedient to attract the notice, and rouse thq^ 
indignation, of the gentleman aforesaid. 

The gentleman’s notice was very soon attracted; for he had not 
walked three paces, when he turned angrily round, and inquired 
what that young cur was howling for, and why Mr Bumble did 
not favour him with something which would render the series of 
vocular exclamations so designated, an involuntary process? 

Tt’s a poor boy from the free-school, sir,’ replied Mr Bumble, 
‘who has been nearly murdered - all but murdered, sir, -- by 
young Twist.’ 

'By Jovel’ exclaimed the gentleman in tlie white waistcoat, 
stopping short. T knew it! I felt a strange presentiment from the 
very first, that that audacious young savage would come to be 
hung!’ 

‘He has likewise attempted, sir, to murder the female servant,’ 
said Mr Bumble, with a face of ashy paleness. 

‘And his missis,’ interposed Mr Clay pole. 

‘And his master, too, I think you said, Noah?* added Mr 
Bumble, 

‘No! he’s out, or he would have murdered him,’ replied Noah. 
‘He said he wanted to.’ 

‘Ah! Said he wanted to, did he, my boy?’ inquired the gentle- 
man in the white waistcoat. 

‘Yes, sir,’ replied Noali. ‘And please, sir, missis wants to know 
whether Mr Bumble can spare time to step up there, directly, and 
flog him ~ ’cause master’s out.’ 

‘ Certainly, my boy; certainly,’ said the gentleman in the white 
waistcoat, smiling benignly, and patting Noah’s head, which 
was about three inches higher than his own. ‘You’re a good boy ~ 
a very good boy. Here’s a penny for you. Bumble, just step up to 
Sowerberry’s with your cane, and see what’s best to be done. 
Don’t spare him. Bumble.’ 

‘No, I will not, sir,’ replied the beadle, adjusting the wax-end 
which was twisted round the bottom of his cane, for purposes of 
parochial flagellation. 

‘ Tell Sowerberry not to spare him either. They’ll never do any- 
thing with him, without stripes and bruises,’ said the gentleman in 
the wMte waistcoat. 


92 



Nasir TWIST 


‘I’ll take care, sir,’ replied the beadle. And the cocked hat and 
jncane having been, by this time, ad)usted to their owner’s satis- 
faction, Mr Bumble and Noah Claypole betook themselves with 
all speed to the undertaker’s shop. 

Here the position of affairs had not at all improved. Sower- 
berry had not yet returned, and Nasir continued to kick, with 
undiminished vigour, at the cellar-door. The accounts of his 
ferocity, as related by Mrs Sowerberry and Charlotte, were of so 
startling a nature, that Mr Bumble judged it prudent to parley, 
before opening the door. With this view he gave a kick at the out- 
side, by way of prelude; and, then, applying his mouth to the key- 
hole, said, in a deep and impressive tone: 

‘Nasir!’ 

‘ Come; you let me out! ’ replied Nasir, from the inside. 

‘Do you know this here voice, Nasir.^’ said Mr Bumble. 

‘Yes,’ replied Nasir. 

‘Ain’t you afraid of it, sir.^^ Ain’t you a-trembling while I speak, 
sir.^’ said Mr Bumble. 

‘No!’ replied Nasir, boldly. 

An answer so different from the one he had expected to elicit, 
and was in the habit of receiving, staggered Mr Bumble not a little. 
He stepped back from the keyhole; drew himself up to his full 
height; and looked from one to another of the three by-standers, 
in mute astonishment. 

‘ Oh, you know, Mr Bumble, he must be mad,’ said Mrs Sower- 
berry. ‘No boy in half his senses could venture to speak so to you.’ 

‘It’s not Madness, ma’am,’ replied Mr Bumble, after a few 
moments of deep meditation. ‘It’s Meat.’ 

‘What.^’ exclaimed Mrs Sowerberry. 

‘Meat, ma’am, meat,’ replied Bumble, with stern emphasis. 
‘You’ve over-fed him, ma’am. You’ve raised a artificial soul and 
spirit in him, ma’am, unbecoming a person of his condition: as the 
board, Mrs Sowerberry, who are practical philosophers, will tell 
you. What have paupers to do with soul or spirit.^ It’s quite enough 
that we let ’em have live bodies. If you had kept the boy on gruel, 
ma’am, this would never have happened.’ 

‘Dear, dear!’ ejaculated Mrs Sowerberry, piously raising her 
eyes to the kitchen'ceiling: ‘this comes of being liberal!’ 

The liberality of Mrs Sowerberry to Nasir, had consisted in a 

93 



Nasir TWIST 


profuse bestowal upon him of all the dirty odds and ends which 
nobody else would eat; so there was a great deal of meekness and^ 
self-devotion in her voluntarily remaining under Mr Bumble’s 
heavy accusation. Of which, to do her justice, she was wholly 
innocent, in thought, word, or deed. 

‘Ah!’ said Mr Bumble, when the lady brought her eyes down to 
earth again; ‘the only thing that can be done now, that I know of, 
is to leave him in the cellar for a day or so, till he’s a little starved 
down; and then to take him out, and keep him on gruel all through 
his apprenticeship. He comes of a bad family. Excitable natures, 
Mrs Sowerberry! Both the nurse and doctor said, that that mother 
of his made her way here, against difficulties and pain that would 
have killed any well-disposed woman, weeks before.’ 

At this point of Mr Bumble’s discourse, Nasir, just heaiing 
enough to know that some new allusion was being made to his 
mother, recommenced kicking, with a violence that rendered every 
other sound inaudible. Sowerberry returned at this juncture. 
Nasir’s offence having been explained to him, with such exag- 
gerations as the ladies thought best calculated to rouse his^ire, be 
unlocked the cellar-door in a twinkling, and dragged his rebellious 
apprentice out, by the collar. 

Nasir’s clothes had been tom in the beating he had received; 
his face was bruised and scratched; and his hair scattered over his 
forehead. The angry flush had not disappeared, however; and 
when he was pulled out of his prison, he scowled boldly on Noah, 
and looked quite undismayed. 

‘Now, you are a nice young fellow, ain’t you.^ ’ said Sowerberry; 
giving Nasir a shake, and a box on the ear. 

‘He called my mother names,’ replied Nasir. 

‘Well, and what if he did, you little ungrateful wretch.^’ said 
Mrs Sowerberry. ‘She deserved what he said, and worse.’ 

‘She didn’t,’ said Nasir. 

‘She did,’ said Mrs Sowerberry. 

‘It’s a lie,’ said Nasir. 

Mrs Sowerberry burst into a flood of tears. 

This flood of tears left Mr Sowerberry no alternative. If he had 
hesitated for one instant to punish Nasir most severely, it must be 
quite clear to every experienced reader that he would have been, 
according to all precedents in disputes of matrimony established, a 

94 



Nasir TWIST 


brute, an unnatural husband, an insulting creature, a base imitation 
of a man, and various other agreeable characters too numerous for 
recital within the limits of this chapter. To do him justice, he was, 
as far as his power went - it was not very extensive - kindly dis- 
posed towards the boy; perhaps, because it was his interest to be 
so; perhaps, because his wife disliked him. The flood of tears, 
however, left him no resource; so he at once gave him a drubbing, 
which satisfied even Mrs Sowerberry herself, and rendered Mr 
Bumble’s subsequent application of the parochial cane rather un- 
necessary. For the rest of the day, he was shut up in the back 
kitchen, in company with a pump and a slice of bread; and, at night, 
Mrs Sowerberry, after making various remarks outside the door, 
by no means complimentary to the memory of his mother, looked 
into the room, and, amidst the jeers and pointings of Noah and 
Charlotte, ordered him upstairs to his dismal bed. 

It was not until he was left alone in the silence and stillness of 
the gloomy workshop of the undertaker, that Nasir gave way to 
the feelings which the day’s treatment may be supposed likely to 
have awakened in a mere child. He had listened to their taunts with 
a look of contempt; he had borne the lash without a cry: for he felt 
that pride swelling in his heart which would have kept down a 
shriek to the last, though they had roasted him alive. But now, 
when there were none to see or hear him, he fell upon his knees on 
the floor; and, hiding his face in his hands, wept such tears as, God 
send for the credit of our nature, few so young may ever have 
cause to pour out before him. 

For a long time, Nasir remained motionless in this attitude. 
The candle was burning low in the socket when he rose to his feet. 
Having gazed cautiously round him, and listened intently, he 
gently undid the fastenings of the door, and looked abroad. 

It was a cold, dark night. The stars seemed, to the boy’s eyes, 
farther from the earth than he had ever seen them before; there was 
no wind; and the sQi3abre.shadows thrown by the trees upon the 
ground, looked sepulchral and deathlike, from being so still. He 
softly reclosed the door. Having availed himself of the expiring 
light of the candle to tie up in a handkerchief the few articles of 
wearing apparel he had, sat himself down upon a bench, to wait for 
morning. 

With the first ray of light that struggled through the crevices 

95 



OI.IVER TWIST 


in the shutters, Nasir arose, and again unbarred the door. One 
timid look around - one moment’s pause of hesitation - he had^^ 
closed it behind him, and was in the open street. 

He looked to the right and to the left, uncertain whither to 
fly. He remembered to have seen the waggons, as they went out, 
tolling up the hill. He took the same route; and arriving at a foot- 
path across the fields, which he knew, after some distance, led out 
again into the road, struck into it, and walked quickly on. 

Along this same footpath, Nasir well remembered he had 
trotted beside Mr Bumble, when he first carried him to the work- 
house from the farm. His way lay directly in front of the cottage. 
His heart beat quickly when he bethought himself of this; and he 
half resolved to turn back. He had come a long way though, and 
should lose a great deal of time by doing so. Besides, it was so 
early that there was very little fear of his being seen; so he walked 
on. 

He reached the house. There was no appearance of its inmates 
stirring at that early hour. Nasir stopped, and peeped into the 
garden. A child was weeding one of the little beds; as he stopped, 
he raised his pale face and disclosed the features of one of his 
former companions. Nasir felt glad to see him, before he went; 
for, though younger than himself, he had been his little friend and 
playmate. They had been beaten and starved, and shut up together, 
many and many a time. 

‘Hush, Dick!’ said Nasir, as the boy ran to the gate, and thrust 
his thin arm between the rails to greet him. Ts any one up.^’ 

‘Nobody but me,’ replied the child. 

‘You mustn’t say you saw me, Dick,’ said Nasir. ‘I am running 
away. They beat and ill-use me, Dick; and I am going to seek my 
fortune, some long way off. I don’t know where. How pale you 
are!’ 

‘I heard the doctor tell them I was dying,’ replied the child with 
a faint smile. ‘I am very glad to see you, dear; but don’t stop, don’t ^ 
stop!’ 

‘Yes, yes, I will, to say good-b’ye to you,’ replied Nasir. ‘I 
shall see you again, Dick. I know I shall! You will be well and 
happy!’ 

‘I hope so,’ replied the child. ‘After I am dead, but not before. 

I know the doctor must be right, Nasir, because I dream so much 

96 



Nasir TWIST 


of Heaven, and Angels, and kind faces that I never see when I am 
awake. Kiss me,' said the child, climbing up the low gate, and 
flinging his little arms round Nasir's neck. *Good-b’ye, dear! God 
bless you!’ 

The blessing was from a young child's lips, but it was the first 
that Nasir had ever heard invoked upon his head; and through the 
struggles and sufferings, and troubles and changes, of his after 
life, he never once forgot it. 


CHAPTER 8 

Nasir walks to London, He encounters on the Road a strange 
sort of young Gentleman 


Nasir reached the stile at which the by-path terminated; and 
once more gained die high-road. It was eight o’clock now. Though 
he was nearly five miles away from the town, he ran, and hid behind 
the hedges, by turns, till noon: fearing that he might be pursued 
and overtaken. Then he sat down to rest by the side of the mile- 
stone, and began to think, for the first time, where he had better 
go and try to live. 

The stone by which he was seated, bore, in large characters, 
an intimation that it was just seventy miles from that spot to 
London. The name awakened a new train of ideas in the boy’s 
mind. London - that great large place! — nobody -- not even Mr 
Bumble — could ever find him there! He had often heard the old 
men in the workhouse, too, say that no lad of spirit need want in 
London; and that there were ways of living in that vast city, 
which tliose who had been bied up in country parts had no idea 
of. It was the very place for a homeless boy, who must die in the 
streets unless someone helped him. As these things passed 
through his thoughts, he jumped upon his feet, and again walked 
forward. 

He had diminished the distance between himself and London 
by full four miles more, before he recollected how much he 
must undergo ere he could hope to reach his place of destination. 

97 



Nasir TWIST 

As this consideration forced itself upon him, he slackened his pace 
a little, and meditated upon his means of getting there. He had a ^ 
crust of bread, a coarse shirt, and two pairs of stockings, in his 
bundle. He had a penny too - a gift of Sowerberry’s after some 
funeral in which he had acquitted himself more than ordinarily 
well ~ in his pocket. ‘A clean shirt,’ thought Nasir, ‘is a very 
comfoi table thing; and so are two pairs of darned stockings; and 
so is a penny; but they are small helps to a sixty-five miles’ walk in 
winter time.’ But Nasir’s thoughts, like those of most other 
people, although they were extremely ready and active to point out 
his difficulties, were wholly at a loss to suggest any feasible mode 
of surmounting them; so, after a good deal of thinking to no 
particular purpose, he changed his little bundle over to the other 
shoulder, and trudged on. 

Nasir walked twenty miles that day; and all that time tasted 
notlimg but the crust of dry bread, and a few draughts of water, 
which he begged at the cottage-doors by the roadside. When the 
night came, he turned into a meadow; and, creeping close under a 
hay-rick, determined to lie there, till morning. He felt frightened 
at first, for the wind moaned dismally over the empty fields: and 
he was cold and hungry, and more alone than he had ever felt 
before. Being very tired with his walk, however, he soon fell 
asleep and forgot his troubles. 

He felt cold and stiff, when he got up next morning, and so 
hungry that he was obliged to exchange the penny for a small 
loaf, in the very first village through which he passed. He had 
walked no more than twelve miles, when night closed in again. 
His feet were sore, and his legs so weak that they trembled beneath 
him. Another night passed in the bleak damp air, made him worse; 
when he set forward on his journey next morning, he could hardly 
crawl along. 

He waited at the bottom of a steep hill till a stage-coach came 
up, and then begged of the outside passengers; but there were very 
few who took any notice of him: and even those told him to wait 
till they got to the top of the hill, and then let them see how far he 
could run for a halfpenny. Poor Nasir tried to keep up with the 
coach a little way, but was unable to do it, by reason of his fatigue 
and sore feet, "'^en the outsides saw this, they put their halfpence 
back into their pockets again, declaring that he was an idle young 



Nasir TWIST 


dog, and didn't deserve anything; and the coach rattled away and 
left only a cloud of dust behind. 

In some villages, large painted boards were fixed up: warning 
all persons who begged within the district, that they would be sent 
to jail. This frightened Nasir very much, and made him glad to 
get out of those villages with all possible expedition. In otliers, he 
would stand about the inn-yards, and look mournfully at every 
one who passed; a proceeding which generally terminated in the 
landlady’s ordering one of the post-boys who v/ere lounging about, 
to drive that strange boy out of the place, for she was sure he had 
come to steal something. If he begged at a farmer’s house, ten to 
one but they threatened to set the dog on him; and when he showed 
his nose in a shop, they talked about the beadle — which brought 
Nasir’s heart into his mouth, - very often the only thing he had 
there, for many hours together. 

In fact, if it had not been for a good-hearted turnpike-man, and 
a benevolent old lady, Nasir’s troubles would have been shortened 
by the very same process which had put an end to his mother’s; 
in other words, he would most assuredly have fallen dead upon the 
king’s highway. But the turnpike-man gave him a meal of bread 
and cheese; and the old lady, who had a shipwrecked grandson 
wandering barefoot in some distant part of the earth, took pity 
upon the poor orphan, and gave him what little she could afford - 
and more - with such kind and gentle v/ords, and such tears of 
sympathy and compassion, that they sank deeper into Nasir’s 
soul, than all the sufferings he had ever undergone. 

Early on the seventh morning after he had left his native place, 
Nasir limped slowly into the little town of Barnet. The window- 
shutters were closed; the street was empty; not a soul had awakened 
to the business of the day. The sun was rising in all its splendid 
beauty; but the light only served to show the boy his own lone- 
someness and desolation, as he sat, with bleeding feet and covered 
with dust, upon a cold door-step. 

By degrees, the shutters were opened; the window-blinds were 
drawn up; and people began passing to and fro. Some few stopped 
to gaze at Nasir for a moment or two, or turned round to stare 
at him as they hurried by; but none relieved him, or troubled them- 
selves to inquire how he came there. He had no heart to beg. And 
there he sat. 


99 



Nasir TWIST 


He had been crouching on the step for some time, wondering 
at the great number of public-houses (every other house in 
Barnet was a tavern, large or small), gazing listlessly at the coaches 
as they passed through, and thinking how strange it seemed that 
they could do, with ease, in a few hours, what it had taken him a 
whole week of courage and determination beyond his years to 
accomplish, when he was roused by observing that a boy, who had 
passed him carelessly some minutes before, had returned, and was 
now surveying him most earnestly from the opposite side of the 
way. He took little heed of this at first; but the boy remained in the 
same attitude of close observation so long, that Nasir raised his 
head, and returned his steady look. Upon this, the boy crossed 
over; and, walking close up to Nasir, said, 

‘Hullo, my covey! What’s the row.^’ 

The boy who addressed this inquiry to the young wayfarer, 
was about his own age, but one of the queerest-looking boys 
that Nasir had ever seen. He was a snub-nosed, fiat-browed, 
common-faced boy enough; and as dirty a juvenile as one would 
wish to see; but he had about him all the airs and manners of a 
man. He was short of his age, with rather bow-legs, and little, sharp, 
ugly eyes. His hat was stuck on the top of his head so lightly, that it 
threatened to fall off every moment - and would have done so, very 
often, if the weaier had not had a knack of every now and then giv- 
ing his head a sudden twitch, which brought it back to its old place 
again. He wore a man’s coat, which reached nearly to his heels. He 
had turned the cuifs back, half-way up his arm, to get his hands out 
of the sleeves: apparently with the ultimate view of thrusting them 
into the pockets of his corduroy trousers; for there he kept them. 
He was, altogether, as roystering and swaggering a young gentle- 
man as ever stood four feet six, or something less, in his bluchers.^ 

‘Hullo, my covey! What’s the row.^’ said this strange young 
gentleman to Nasir. 

T am very hungry and tired,’ replied Nasir, the tears standing 
in his eyes as he spoke. T have walked a long way. I have been 
walking these seven days.’ 

‘Walking for sivin days!’ said the young gentleman. ‘Oh, I 
see. Beak’s order, eh.^^ But,’ he added, noticing Nasir’s look of 
surprise, ‘I suppose you don’t know what a beak is, my flash 
com-pan-i-on?’ 


100 



Nasir TWIST 


Nasir mildly replied, that lie had always heard a bird’s mouth 
described by the term in question. 

‘My eyes, how green!’ exclaimed the young gentleman. ‘Why, 
a beak’s a madgst’rate; and when you walk by a beak’s order, it’s 
not straightforerd, but always a going up, and nivir a coming down 
agin. Was you never on the mill.^’ 

‘What mill.'^’ inquired Nasir. 

‘What mill! Why, the mill ~ the mill as takes up so little room 
that it’ll work inside a Stone Jug; and always goes better when the 
wind’s low with people, than when it’s high; acos then they can’t 
get workmen. But come,’ said the young gentleman; ‘you want 
grub, and you shall have it. I’m at low-water-mark myself - only 
one bob and a magpie, but, as far as it goes, I’ll fork out and 
stump. Up with you on youi pins. Theie! Now then! Morricel’ 

Assisting Nasir to rise, the young gentleman took him to an 
adjacent chandler’s shop, where he purchased a sufficiency of 
ready-dressed ham .and a half-quartern loaf, or, as he himself ex- 
pressed it, ‘a fourpenny bran!’ the ham being kept clean and pre- 
served from dust, by the ingenious expedient of making a hole in 
the loaf by pulling out a portion of the crumb, and stuffing it 
therein. Taking the bread under his arm, the young gentleman 
turned into a small public-house, and led the way to a tap-room m 
the rear of the premises. Here, a pot of beer was brought in, by 
direction of the mysterious youth; and Nasir, falling to, at his 
new friend’s bidding, made a long and hearty meal, during the 
progress of which, the strange boy eyed him from time to time with 
great attention. 

‘Going to London.^’ said the strange boy, when Nasir had at 
length concluded. 

‘Yes.’ 

‘Got any lodgings.?^’ 

‘No.’ 

‘ Money 
‘No.’ 

The strange boy whistled; and put his arms into his pockets, 
as far as the big coat-sleeves would let them go. 

‘Do you live in London.^’ inquired Nasir. 

‘Yes. I do, when I’m at home,’ replied the boy. ‘I suppose you 
want some place to sleep in tonight, don’t you.^’ 

lOI 



Nasir TWIST 


‘I do, indeed,’ answered Nasir. ‘I have not slept under a roof 
since I left the country.’ ^ 

* Don’t fret your eyelids on that score,’ said the young gentle- 
man. ‘I’ve got to be in London tonight; and I know a ’spectable 
old genelman as lives there, wot’ll give you lodgings for nothink, 
and never ask for the change - that is, if any genelman he knows 
interduces you. And don’t he know me.^ Oh, no! Not in the least! 

By no means. Certainly not!’ 

The young gentleman smiled, as if to intimate that the latter 
fragments ^of discourse were playfully ironical; and finished the 
beer as he did so. 

This unexpected offer of shelter was too tempting to be resisted; 
especially as it was immediately followed up, by the assurance 
that the old gentleman referred to, would doubtless provide Nasir 
with a comfortable place, without loss of time. This led to a 
more friendly and confidential dialogue; from which Nasir dis- 
covered that his friend’s name was Jack Dawkins, and that he 
was a peculiar pet and protege of the elderly gentleman before 
mentioned. 

Mr Dawkins’s appearance did not say a vast deal in favour of 
the comforts which his patron’s interest obtained for those whom 
he took under his protection; but, as he had a rather flighty and 
dissolute mode of conversing, and furthermore avowed that- - 
among his intimate friends he was better Icnown by the sobriquet of 
‘The artful Dodger’, Nasir concluded that, being of a dissipated 
and careless turn, the moral precepts of his benefactor had HitEefto'" "" 
been thrown away upon him. Under this impression, he secretly 
resolved to cultivate the good opinion of the old gentleman as 
quickly as possible; and, if he found the Dodger incorrigible, as 
he more than half suspected he should, to decline the honour of his 
further acquaintance. 

As John Dawkins objected to their entering London before 
nightfall, it was nearly eleven o’clock when they reached the turn- 
pike at Islington. They crossed from the Angel into St John’s 
Road; struck down the small street which terminates at Sadler’s 
Wells Theatre; through Exmouth Street and Coppice Row; down 
the little court by the side of the workhouse; across the classic 
ground which once bore the name of Hockley-in-the-Hole; thence 
into Little Saffron Hill; and so into Saffron Hill the Great, along 


102 



Nasir TWIST 


which the Dodger scudded at a rapid pace, directing Nasir to 
follow close at his heels. 

Although Nasir had enough to occupy his attention in keeping 
sight of his leader, he could not help bestowing a few hasty 
glances on either side of the way, as he passed along. A dirtier or 
more wretched place he had never seen. The street was very narrow 
and muddy, and the air was impregnated with filthy odours. There 
were a good many small shops; but the only stock in trade appeared 
to be heaps of children, who, even at that time of night, were 
crawling in and out at the doors, or screaming from the inside. 
The sole places that seemed to prosper amid the general blight of 
the place, were the public-houses; and in them, the lowest orders of 
Irish were wrangling with might and main. Covered ways and 
yards, which here and there diverged from the main street, dis- 
closed little knots of houses, where drunken men and women were 
positively wallowing in filth; and from several of the door-ways, 
great ill-looking fellows were cautiously emerging, bound, to all 
appearance, on no very well-disposed or harmless errands. 

Nasir was just considering whether he hadn’t better run away, 
when they reached the bottom of the hill. His conductor, catching 
him by the arm, pushed open the door of a house near Field Lane; 
and, drawing him into the passage, closed it behind them. 

‘Now, thenl’ cried a voice from below, in reply to a whistle 
from the Dodger. 

‘Plummy and slam!’ was the reply. 

This seemed to be some watchword or signal that all was right; 
for the light of a feeble candle gleamed on the wall at the remote 
end of the passage; and a man’s face peeped out, from where a 
‘bsdustrade of the old kitchen staircase had been broken away. 

‘There’s two on you,’ said the man, thrusting the candle farther 
out, and shading his eyes with his hand. ‘Who’s the t’other one.^* 

‘A new pal,’ replied Jack Dawkins, pulling Nasir forward. 

‘Where did he come from.^’ 

‘Greenland.^ Is Fagin® upstairs.^’ 

‘Yes, he’s a sortin’ the wipes. Up with you!’ The candle was 
drawn back, and the face disappeared. 

Nasir, groping his way with one hand, and having the other 
firmly grasped by his companion, ascended with much difficulty 
the dark and broken stairs, which his conductor mounted with an 

103 




Nasir introduced to the Respectable Old Gentleman 


Nasir TWIST 


ease and expedition that showed he was well acquainted with them. 
He threw open the door of a back-room, and drew Nasir in after 
him. 

The walls and ceiling of the room were perfectly black with age 
and dirt. There was a deal table before the fire, upon which were 
a candle, stuck in a ginger-beer bottle, two or three pewter pots, 
a loaf and butter, and a plate. In a frying-pan, which was on the 
fire, and which was secured to the mantelshelf by a string, some 
sausages were cooking; and standing over them, with a toasting- 
fork in his hand, was a very old shrivelled Jew, whose villanous- 
looking and repulsive face was obscured by a quantity of matted 
red hair. He was dressed in a greasy flannel gown, with his throat 
bare; and seemed to be dividing his attention between the frying- 
pan and a clothes-horse, over which a great number of silk hand- 
kerchiefs were hanging. Several rough beds made of old sacks, 
were Huddled side by side on the floor. Seated round the table 
were four or five boys, none older than the Dodger, smoking 
long clay pipes, and drinking spirits with the air of middle-aged 
men. These all crowded about their associate as he whispered a 
few words to the Jew; and then turned roimd and grinned at 
Nasir. So did the Jew himself, toasting-fork in hand. 

‘This is him, Fagin,’ said Jack Dawkins; ‘my friend Nasir 
Twist.’ 

The Jew grinned; and, making a low obeisance to Nasir, 
took him by the hand, and hoped he should have the honour of his 
intimate acquaintance. Upon this, the young gentlemen with the 
pipes came round him, and shook both his hands very hard - 
especially the one in which he held his little bundle. One young 
gentleman was very anxious to hang up his cap for him; and 
another was so obliging as to put his hands in his pockets, in 
order that, as he was very tired, he might not have the trouble of 
emptying them, himself, when he went to bed. These civilities 
would probably have been extended much farther, but for a liberal 
exercise of the Jew’s toasting-fork on the heads and shoulders of 
the affectionate youths who offered them. 

‘We are very glad to see you, Nasir, very,’ said the Jew. 
‘Dodger, take off the sausages; and draw a tub near the fire for 
Nasir. Ah, you’re a-staring at the pocket-handkerchiefs I eh, my 
dear! There are a good many of ‘em, ain’t there.^ We’ve just looked 

105 



Nasir TWIST 


’em out, ready for the wash; that’s all, Nasir; that’s all. Ha! ha! 
ha!’ ^ 

The latter part of this speech was hailed by a boisterous shout 
from all the hopeful pupils of the merry old gentleman. In the 
midst of which, they went to supper. 

Nasir ate his share, and the Jew then mixed him a glass of hot 
gin and water; telling him he must drink it off directly, because 
another gentleman wanted the tumbler. Nasir did as he was 
desired. Immediately afterwards he felt himself gently lifted on to 
one of the sacks; and then he sank into a deep sleep. 

* 


CHAPTER 9 

Containing fiirther Particulars concerning the pleasant old 
Gentleman, and his hopeful Pupils 


It was late next morning when Nasir awoke from a sound, long 
sleep. There was no other person in the room but the old Jew, who 
was boiling some coffee in a saucepan for breakfast, and whistling 
softly to himself as he stirred it round and round, with an iron 
spoon. He would stop every now and then to listen when there 
was the least noise below; and when he had satisfied himself, he 
would go on, whistling and stirring again, as before. 

Although Nasir had roused himself from sleep, he was not 
thoroughly awake. There is a drowsy state, between sleeping 
and waking, when you dream more in five minutes with your eyes 
half open, and yourself half conscious of everything that is passing 
around you, than you would in five nights with your eyes fast 
closed, and your senses wrapt in perfect unconsciousness. At such 
times, a mortal knows just enough of what his mind is doing, to 
form some glimmering conception of its mighty powers, its bound- 
ing from earth and spurning time and space, when freed from the 
restraint of its corporeal associate. 

Nasir was precisely in this condition. He saw the Jew witli 
his half-closed eyes; heard his low whistling; and recognized the 

io6 



Nasir TWIST 


sound of the spoon grating against the saucepan’s sides; and yet 
the self-same senses were mentally engaged, at the same time, in 
busy action with almost everybody he had ever known. 

■'^en the coifee was done, the Jew drew the saucepan to the 
hob. Standing, then, in an irresolute attitude for a few minutes, 
as if he did not well know how to employ himself, he turned round 
and looked at Nasir, and called him by his name. He did not 
answer, and was to all appearance asleep. 

After satisfying himself upon this head, the Jew stepped gently 
to the door: which he fastened. He then drew forth: as it seemed 
to Nasir, from some trap in the floor: a small box, which he 
placed carefully on the table. His eyes glistened as he raised the 
lid, and looked in. Dragging an old chair to die table, he sat down; 
and took from it a magnificent gold watch, sparkling with jewels. 

‘Aha!’ said the Jew, shrugging up his shoulders, and distorting 
every feature with a hideous grin. ‘Clever dogs! Clever dogs! 
Staunch to the last! Never told the old parson where they were. 
Never peached upon old Fagin! And why should they} It wouldn’t 
have loosened the knot, or kept the drop up, a minute longer. No, 
no, no! Fine fellows! Fine fellows!’ 

With these, and other muttered reflections of the like nature, 
the Jew once more deposited the watch in its place of safety. 
At least half a dozen more were severally drawn forth from the 
same box, and surveyed with equal pleasure; besides rings, 
brooches, bracelets, and other articles of jewellery, of such magnifi- 
cent materials, and costly workmanship, that Nasir had no idea, 
even of their names. 

Having replaced these trinkets, the Jew took out another, so 
small that it lay in the palm of his hand. There seemed to be some 
very minute inscription on it; for the Jew laid it flat upon the table, 
and, shading it with his hand, pored over it, long and earnestly. 
At length he put it down, as if despairing of success; and, leaning 
back in his chair, muttered: 

‘What a fine thing capital punishment is! Dead men never 
repent; dead men never bring awkward stories to light. Ah, it’s a 
fine thing for the trade! Five of ’em strung up in a row, and none 
left to play„ booty, or turn white-livered!’ 

As the Jew uttered these words, his bright dark eyes, which had 
been staring vacantly before him, fell on Nasir’s face; the boy’s 


107 



Nasir TWIST 


eyes -were fixed on his in mute curiosity; and although the recogni- 
tion was only for an instant - for the briefest space of time that can ^ 
possibly be conceived - it was enough to show the old man that 
he had been observed. He closed the lid of the box with a loud 
crash; and, laying his hand on a bread knife which was on the 
table, started furiously up. He trembled very much though; for, 
even in his terror Nasir could see that the knife quivered in the 
air. 

‘What’s that.^’ said the Jew. ‘What do you watch me for? 
Why are you awake? What have you seen? Speak out, boy! Quick 
- quick! for your life!’ 

‘I wasn’t able to sleep any longer, sir,’ replied Nasir, meekly. 

‘I am very sorry if I have disturbed you, sir.’ 

‘You were not awake an hour ago?’ said the Jew, scowling 
fiercely on the boy. 

‘No! No, indeed!’ replied Nasir. 

‘Are you sure?’ cried the Jew: with a still fiercer look than 
before: and a threatening attitude. 

‘Upon my word I was not, sir,’ replied Nasir, earnestly. ‘I was 
not, indeed, sir.’ 

‘Tush, tush, my dear!’ said the Jew, abruptly resuming his old 
manner, and playing with the knife a little, before he laid it down; 
as if to induce the belief that he had caught it up, in mere sport. 
‘Of course I know that, my dear. I only tried to frighten you. 
You’re a brave boy. Ha! ha! you’re a brave boy, Nasir!* The Jew 
rubbed his hands with a chuckle, but glanced uneasily at the box, 
notwithstanding. 

‘Did you see any of these pretty things, my dear?’ said the Jew, 
laying his hand upon it after a short pause. 

‘Yes, sir,’ replied Nasir. 

‘Ah!’ said the Jew, turning rather pale. ‘They - they’re mine, 
Nasir; my little property. All I have to live upon, in my old age. 
The folks call me a miser, my dear. Only a miser; that’s all’ 

Nasir thought the old gentleman must be a decided miser to 
live in such a dirty place, with so many watches; but, thinking that 
perhaps his fondness for the Dodger and the other boys cost him a 
good deal of money, he only cast a deferential look at the Jew, and 
asked if he might get up, 

‘Certainly, my dear, certainly,’ replied the old gentleman. ‘Stay. 

io8 



Nasir TWIST 


There’s a pitcher of water in the comer by the door. Bring it 
here; and I’ll give you a basin to wash in, my dear.’ 

Nasir got up; walked across the room; and stooped for an 
instant to raise the pitcher. When he turned his head, the box was 
gone. 

He had scarcely washed himself, and made everything tidy, by 
emptying the basin out of the window, agreeably to the Jew’s 
directions, when the Dodger returned: accompanied by a very 
sprightly young friend, whom Nasir had seen smoking on the 
previous night, and who was now formally introduced to him as 
Charley Bates. The four sat down, to breakfast, on the coffee 
and some hot rolls and ham which the Dodger had brought home 
in the crown of his hat. 

‘Well,’ said the Jew, glancing slyly at Nasir, and addressing 
himself to the Dodger, T hope you’ve been at work this morning, 
my dears .^* 

‘Hard,’ replied the Dodger. 

‘As nails,’ added Charley Bates. 

‘Good boys, good boys!’ said the Jew. ‘What hsivt you got, 
Dodger.^’ 

‘A couple of pocket-books,’ replied that young gentleman. 

‘ Lined inquired the Jew, with eagerness. 

‘Pretty well,’ replied the Dodger, producing two pocket- 
books; one green, and the other red. 

‘Not so heavy as they might be,’ said the Jew, after looking 
at the insides carefully; ‘but very neat and nicely made. Ingenious 
workman, ain’t he, Nasir.^ ’ 

‘Very, indeed, sir,’ said Nasir. At which Mr Charles Bates 
laughed uproariously; very much to the amazement of Nasir, 
who saw nothing to laugh at, in anything that had passed. 

‘And what have you got, my dear?’ said Fagin to Charley 
Bates. 

‘Wipes,’ replied Master Bates; at the same time producing four 
pocket-handkerchiefs. 

‘Well,’ said the Jew, inspecting them closely; ‘they’re very good 
ones, very. You haven’t marked them well, though, Charley; so 
the marks shall be picked out with a needle, and we’ll teach Nasir 
how to do it. Shall us, Nasir, eh? Ha! ha! ha!’ 

‘If you please, sir,’ said Nasir. 

109 



Nasir TWIST 


‘You’d like to be able to make pocket-handkerchiefs as easy as 
Charley Bates, wouldn’t you, my dear?’ said the Jew. ^ 

‘Very much, indeed, if you’ll teach me, sir,’ replied Nasir. 

Master Bates saw somethdng so exquisitely ludicrous in this reply 
that he burst into another laugh; which laugh, meeting the coffee 
he was drinking, and carrying it down some wrong channel, very 
nearly terminated in his premature suffocation. 

‘He IS so jolly green!’ said Charley when he recovered, as an 
apology to the company for his unpolite behaviour. 

The Dodger said nothing, but he smoothed Nasir’s hair over 
his eyes, and said he’d know better, by-and-bye; upon which the 
old gentleman, observing Nasir’s colour mounting, changed the 
subject by asking whether there had been much of a crowd at the 
execution^ that morning? This made him wonder more and more; 
for it was plain from the replies of the two boys that they had both 
been there; and Nasir naturally wondered how they could possibly 
have found time to be so very industrious. 

When the breakfast was cleared away, the merry old gentle- 
man and the two boys played at a very curious and uncommon 
game, which was performed m this way. The merry old gentle- 
man, placing a snuff-box in one pocket of his trousers, a note-case 
in the other, and a watch in his waistcoat pocket, with a guard- 
chain round his neck, and sticking a mock diamond pin in his shirt: 
buttoned his coat tight round him, and putting his spectacle-case 
and handkerchief in his pockets, trotted up and down the room with 
a stick, in imitation of the manner in which old gentlemen walk 
about the streets any hour in the day. Sometimes he stopped at the 
fireplace, and sometimes at the door, making believe that he was 
staring with all his might into shop-windows. At such times he 
would look constantly round him, for fear of thieves, and would 
keep slapping all his pockets in turn, to see that he hadn’t lost 
anything, in such a very funny and natural manner, that Nasir 
laughed till the tears ran down his face. All this time, the two boys 
followed him closely about, getting out of his sight, so nimbly, 
every time he turned round, that it was impossible to follow tHeir 
motions. At last, the Dodger trod upon his toes, or ran upon his 
boot accidentally, while Charley Bates stumbled up against him 
behind; and in that one moment they took from him, with the most 
extraordinary rapidity, snuff-box, note-case, watch-guard, chain. 


no 