CHARACTERS 


MarthAj a pauper, 

Mrs Maylie, cz lady who hefrzends Nasir Twist, 
Rose Maylie, adopted daughter of the preceding, 
Nancy, a thief m Fagins service. 

Old Sally, £? workhouse inmate, 

Mrs Sowerberry, a sour, vixenish woman. 



CHAPTER I 


Treats of the Place where Nasir Twist was Born 3 and of the 
Circumstances attending his Birth 


Among other public buildings m a ceitain town which for many 
reasons it will be prudent to lefrain from mentioning, and to 
which I will assign no fictitious name, it boasts of one which is 
common to most towns, great or small, to wit, a workhouse; and in 
this w^orkhouse was born, on a day and date which I need not take 
upon m\'self to repeat, inasmuch as it can be of no possible con- 
sequence to the reader, in this stage of the business at all events, the 
Item of mortality whose name is prefixed to the head of this chapter. 
For a long time after he was ushered into this wmrld of sorrow and 
trouble, by the parish surgeon, it remained a matter of consider- 
able doubt whether the child would suivdve to bear any name at all; 
in \\’hich case it is sometvhat more than probable that these memoirs 
would never have appeared, or, if they had, being comprised within 
a couple of pages, that they would ha\'e possessed the inestimable 
merit of being the most concise and faithful specimen of biography 
extant in the literature of any age or country. Altliough I am not 
disposed to maintain that tile being born in a workhouse is in 
itself the most fortunate and enviable circumstance that can 
possibly befall a human being, I do mean to sa\ that in this par- 
ticular instance it was the best thing for Nasir Twist that could by 
possibility have occurred. The fact is, that there was considerable 
difficulty m inducing Nasir to take upon himself the office of 
respiration, - a troublesome practice, but one which custom has 
rendered necessary .to our easy existence, - and for some time he 
lay gasping on a little flock mattress, rather unequally poised 
between this world and the ne3aj'"'fh‘e balance being decidedly in 
favour of the latter. Now, if during this brief period, Nasir had 
been surrounded by careful grandmothers, anxious aunts, experi- 
enced nurses, and doctors of profound wfisdom, he would most 
inevitably and indubitably have been killed in no time. There 
being nobody by, however, but pauper old woman, who was 
lendered rather misty by an unwonted allowance of beer, and a 
pansh surgeon who did such matters b}*^ contract, Nasir and 

45 



Nasir TWIST 


Nature fought out the point between them. The result was, that, 
after a few struggles, Nasir breathed, sneezed, and proceeded 
advertise to the inmates of the workhouse the fact of a new burden 
having been imposed upon the parish, by setting up as loud a cry 
as could reasonably have been expected from a male infant who had 
not been possessed of that very useful appendage, a vOice, for a 
much longer space of time than three minutes and a quarter. 

As Nasir gave this first proof of the free and proper action 
of his lungs, the patchwork coverlet which was carelessly flung 
over the iron bedstead, rustled; the pale face of a young female 
was raised feebly from the pillow; and a faint voice imperfectly 
articulated the words, ‘Let me see the child, and die.’ 

The surgeon had been sitting with his face turned towards the 
fire, giving the palms of his hands a warm and a rub alternately; but 
as the young woman spoke, he rose, and advancing to the bed’s head, 
said, with more kindness than might have been expected of him - 

‘ Oh, you must not talk about dying yet.’ 

‘Lor bless her dear heart, no!’ interposed the nurse, hastily 
depositing in her pocket a green glass bottle, the contents of which 
she had been tasting in a corner with evident satisfaction. ‘Lor 
bless her dear heart, when she has lived as long as I have, sir, and 
had thirteen children of her own, and all on ’em dead except two, 
and them in the wurkus with me, she’ll know better than to take 
on in that way, bless her dear heart! Think what it is to be a 
mother, there’s a dear young lamb, do.’ 

Apparently this consolatory perspective of a mother’s prospects 
failed in producing its due effect. The patient shook her head, and 
stretched out her hand towards the child. 

The surgeon deposited it in her arms. She imprinted her cold 
white lips passionately on its forehead, passed her hand-over her 
face, gazed wildly round, shuddered, fell back - and died. They 
chafed her breast, hands, and temples; but the blood had frozen 
for ever. They talked of hope and comfort. They had been strangers 
too long. 

‘It’s all over, Mrs Thingummy,’ said the surgeon at last. 

‘Ah, poor dear, so it is!’ said the nurse, picking up the cork of 
the green bottle which had fallen out on the pillow as she stooped 
to take up the child, ‘Poor dear!’ 

‘You needn’t mind sending up to me, if the child cries, nurse,’ 

46 



Nasir TWIST 


said the surgeon, putting on his gloves witli great deliberation. 
‘It’s very likely it will be troublesome. Give it a little gruel if it is.“ 
He put on his hat, and, pausing by the bed-side on his way to the 
door, added, ‘She was a good-looking girl, too; where did she 
come from.^’ 

‘She was brought here last night,' replied the old woman, ‘by 
the overseer’s order. She was found lying in the street; - she had 
walked some distance, for her shoes were worn to pieces; but 
where she came from, or where she was going to, nobody knows.’ 

The surgeon leant over the body, and raised the left hand. ‘ The 
old story,’ he said, shaking his head: ‘no wedding-ring, I see. Ah! 
Good night!’ 

The medical gentleman walked away to dinner; and the nurse, 
having once more applied herself to the green bottle, sat down 
on a low chair before the fire, and proceeded to dress the infant. 

What an excellent example of the power of dress young Nasir 
Twist was! Wrapped in the blanket which had hitherto formed his 
only covering, he might have been the child of a nobleman or a 
beggar; - it w^ould ha\-e been hard for the haughtiest stranger to 
have fixed his station in societ3% But now thaf he was enveloped in 
the old calico robes, which had grown yellow’ in the same sertnce, 
he was badged and ticketed, and fell into his place at once - a 
parish child - the orphan of a workhouse - the humble half-starred 
drudge - to be cuffed and buffeted through the world, - despised 
by all, and pitied 'by none. 

Nasir cried lustily. If he could have known that he was an 
orphan, left to the tender mercies of churchwardens and ovei- 
seers, perhaps he wmuld have cried the louder. 


CHAPTER 2 

Treats of Nasir Twist^s Growth ^ Education, and Board 


For the next eight or ten months, Nasir was the victim of a 
systematic course of treachery and deception - he was brought up 
by hand. The hungry and destitute situation of the infant orphan 

47 



Nasir TWIST 


was duly reported by the workhouse authorities to the parish 
authorities. The parish authorities inquired with dignity of the^ 
workhouse authorities, whether there was no female then domiciled 
in ‘the house’ who was in a situation to impart to Nasir Twist 
the consolation and nourishment of which he stood in need. The 
workhouse authorities replied with humility that there was not. 
Upon this, the parish authorities magnanimously and humanely 
resolved, diat Nasir should be ‘farmed’, or, in other words, that 
he should be dispatched to a branch-workhouse some three miles 
off, where twenty or thirty other juvenile offenders against the 
poor-laws rolled about the floor all day, without the inconvenience 
of too much food or too much clothing, under the parental super- 
intendence of an elderly female who received the culprits at and for 
the consideration of sevenpence-halfpenny per small head per 
week. Sevenpence-halfpenny’s worth per week is a good round 
diet for a child; a great deal may be got for sevenpence-halfpenny - 
quite enough to overload its stomach, and make it uncomfortable. 
The elderly female was a woman of wisdom and experience; she 
knew what was good for children, and she had a very accurate 
perception of what was good for herself. So, she appropriated the 
greater part of the weekly stipend to her own use, and consigned 
die rising parochial generation to even a shorter allowance than 
was originally provided for them; thereby finding in the lowest 
depth a deeper still, and proving herself a very great experimental 
philosopher. 

Everybody knows the story of another experimental philo- 
sopher, who had a great theory about a horse being able to live 
without eating, and who demonstrated it so well, that he got his 
own horse down to a straw a day, and would unquestionably 
have rendered him a very spirited and rampacious animal on 
nothing at all, if he had not died, just four-and-twenty hours before 
he was to have had his first comfortable bait of air. Unfortunately 
for the experimental philosophy of the female to whose protecting 
care Nasir Twist was delivered over, a similar result usually 
attended the operation of her system; for at the very moment when 
a child had contrived to exist upon the smallest possible portion 
of the weakest possible food, it did perversely happen in eight and a 
half cases out of ten, either that it sickened from want and cold, 
or fell into the fire from neglect, or got half smothered by accident; 

48 



Nasir TWIST 


in any one of which cases, the miserable little being was usually 
summoned into another world, and there gathered to the fathers 
it had never known in this. 

Occasionally, when there was some more than usually interest- 
ing inquest upon a parish child who had been overlooked in turn- 
ing iip a bedstead, or inadvertently scalded to death when there 
happened to be a washing, though the latter accident was very 
scarce, - anything approaching to a washing being of rare occur- 
rence in the farm, - the jury would take it into their heads to ask 
troublesome questions, or the parishioners would rebelliously 
affix their signatures to a remonstrance: but these impertinences 
were speedily checked by the evidence of the surgeon, and the 
testimony of the beadle* the former of whom had always opened 
the body and found nothing inside (which was very probable 
indeed), and the latter of whom invariably swore whatevei the 
parish wanted, which was very self-devotional. Besides, die board 
made periodical pilgrimages to the farm, and always sent the 
beadle the day before, to say they w’ere going. The children were 
neat and clean to behold, when they went; and what more would 
the people have.^ 

It cannot be expected that this system of farming would produce 
any very extraordinary or luxuriant crop. Nasir Twist's ninth 
birthday found him a pale thin child, somewhat diminutive in 
stature, and decidedly small in circumference. But nature or in- 
heritance had implanted a good sturdy spirit in Nasir's breast; it 
had had plenty of room to expand, thanks to the spare diet of the 
establishment; and perhaps to this circumstance may be attributed 
his having any ninth birthday at all. Be this as it may, however, it 
was his ninth birthday; and he was keeping it in tlie coal-cellar with 
a select party of two other young gentlemen, who, after participat- 
ing with him in a sound thrashing, had been locked up therein for 
atrociously presuming to be hungry, when Mrs Mann, the good lady 
of the house, was unexpectedly startled by the apparition of Mr 
Bumble the beadle striving to undo the wicket of the garden-gate, 

‘Goodness gracious! Is that you, Mr Bumble, sir.^' said Mrs 
Mann, thrusting her head out of the window in well-affected 
ecstasies of joy. ‘ (Susan, take Nasir and them two brats up stairs, 
and wash ’em directly.) My heart alive! Mr Bumble, how glad I 
am to see you, sure-ly! ’ 


49 



Nasir TWIST 


Now Mr Bumble was a fat man, and a choleric one; so, instead 
of responding to this open-hearted salutation in a kindred spirit,|u 
he gave the little wicket a tremendous shake, and then bestowed 
upon It a kick which could have emanated from no leg but a beadle’s. 

‘Lor, only think,’ said Mrs Mann, running out, ~ for the three 
boys had been removed by this time, ~ ‘ only think of that! That I 
should have forgotten that the gate was bolted on the inside, on 
account of them dear children! Walk in, sir; walk in, pray, Mr 
Bumble, do, sir.’ 

Although this invitation was accompanied with a curtsey that 
might have softened the heart of a churchwarden, it by no means 
mollified the beadle. 

‘Do you think this respectful or proper conduct, Mrs Mann,’ 
inquired Mr Bumble, grasping his cane, ‘ - to keep the parish officers 
a-waiting at your garden-gate, when they come here upon 
porochial business connected with the porochial orphans.^ Are you 
aware, Mrs Mann, that you are, as I may say, a porochial delegate, 
and a stipendiary.^’ 

‘I’m sure, Mr Bumble, that I was only a-telling one or two of the 
dear children as is so fond of you, that it was you a-commg,’ 
replied Mrs Mann with great humility. 

Mr Bumble had a great idea of his oratoncal powers and lus 
importance. He had displayed the one, and vindicated the other. 
He relaxed. 

‘Well, well, Mrs Mann,’ he replied in a calmer tone; ‘it may be 
as you say; it may be. Lead the way in, Mrs Mann, for I come on 
business, and have got something to say.’ 

Mrs Mann ushered the beadle into a small parlour with a brick 
floor; placed a seat for him, and officiously deposited his cocked 
hat and cane on the table before him. Mr Bumble wiped from his 
forehead the perspiration which his walk had engendered, glanced 
complacently at the cocked hat, and smiled. Yes, he smiled: beadles 
are but men, and Mr Bumble smiled. 

‘Now don’t you be offended at what I’m a-going to say,’ 
observed Mrs Mann, with captivating sweetness. ‘You’ve had a 
long walk, you know, or I wouldn’t mention it. Now, will you take 
a little drop of something, Mr Bumble.^’ 

‘Not a drop. Not a drop,’ said Mr Bumble, waving his right 
hand in a dignified, but still placid manner. 

50 



Nasir TWIST 


f 


‘I think you will/ said Mrs Mann, who had noticed the tone of 
tlie refusal, and the gesture that had accompanied it. ‘Jtist a ketle 
drop, with a little cold water, and a lump of sugar.’ 

Mr Bumble coughed. 

‘Now, just a little drop,’ said Mrs Mann persuasively. 

‘What is it.^’ inquired the beadle. 

‘Why, it’s what I’m obliged to keep a little of in the house, to 
put into the blessed infants’ Daily/ when they ain’t well, Mr 
Bumble,’ replied Mrs Mann as she opened a corner cupboard, and 
took down a bottle and glass. ‘It’s gin. I’ll not deceive you, Mr B. 
It!s gin.’ 

‘Do you give the children Daffy, Mrs Mann.^’ inquired Bumble, 
following with his eyes the interesting process of mixing. 

‘Ah, bless ’em, that I do, dear as it is,’ replied the nurse. 'I 
couldn’t see ’em suffer before my very eyes, you know, sir.’ 

‘No,’ said Mr Bumble approvingly; ‘no, you could not. You 
are a humane woman, Mrs Mann.’ -- (Here she set down the glass.) - 
‘I shall take an early opportunity of mentioning it to the board, 
Mrs Mann.’ ~ (He drew it towards him.) - 'You feel as a mother, 
Mis Mann.’ - (He stirred the gm-and-Vvater.) - ‘I I drink your 
health with cheerfulness, Mis Mann’, - and he swallowed half of 


‘And now about business,’ said the beadle, taking out a leatliern 
pocket-book. ‘The child that was half-baptized Nasir Twist, is 
nine year old today.’ 

‘Bless him!’ interposed Mrs Mann, inflaming her left eye with 
the corner of her apron. 

‘And notwithstanding a offered reward of ten pound, which was 
afterwards increased to twenty pound, -- notwithstanding the most 
superlative, and, I may say, supernat’ral exertions on the part of 
this parish,’ said Bumble, ‘we have never been able to discover who 
is his father, or what was his mother’s settlement, name, or con- 
dition.’ 

Mrs Mann raised her hands in astonishment; but added, after 
a moment’s reflection, ‘How comes he to have any name at all, 
then.^’ 

The liimself'CiB with great pride, and said, ‘I 

inwen^drSt.^^^'^^^'^ ^ 

“TTb^^MrEumblel’ 





Nasir TWIST 


‘I, Mrs Mann. We name our fondlings in alphabetical order. 
The last was a S, - Swubble, I named him. This was a T, - Twist, IS.- 
named him. The next one as comes will be Unwin, and the next 
Vilkms. I have got names ready made to the end of the alphabet, 
and all the way through it again, when we come to Z.’ 

‘ ’^Hiy, you’re quite a literary character, sir! ’ said Mrs Mann. 

‘Well, well,’ said the beadle, evidently gratified with the compli- 
ment; ‘perhaps I may be, - perhaps I may be, Mrs Mann.’ He 
finished the gin-and-water, and added, ‘ Nasir being now too old 
to remain here, the board have determined to have him back into 
the house, and I have come out myself to take him there, - so let me 
see him at once.’ 

‘I’ll fetch him directly,’ said Mrs Mann, leaving the room for 
that purpose. And Nasir, having had by this time as much of 
the outer coat of dirt, which encrusted his face and hands, removed, 
as could be scrubbed off in one washing, was led into the room by 
his benevolent protectress. 

‘ Make a bow to the gentleman, Nasir,’ said Mrs Mann. 

Nasir made a bow, which was divided between the beadle on 
the chair and the cocked hat on the table. 

‘Will you go along with me, Nasir.^’ said Mr Bumble in a 
majestic voice. 

Nasir was about to say that he would go along with anybody 
with great readiness, when, glancing upward, he caught sight of 
Mrs Mann, who had got behind the beadle’s chair, and was shaking 
her hst at him with a furious countenance. He took the hint at 
once, for the fist had been too often impressed upon his body not to 
be deeply impressed upon his recollection. 

‘Will she go with me?’ inquired poor Nasir. 

‘No, she can’t,’ replied Mr Bumble. ‘But she’ll come and see you 
sometimes.’ 

This was no very great consolation to the child; but, young as 
he was, he had sense enough to make a feint of feeling great regret 
at going away. It was no very difficult matter for the boy to call 
tears into his eyes. Hunger and recent ill-usage are great assistants 
if you want to cry; and Nasir cried very naturally indeed. Mrs 
Mann gave liim a thousand embraces, and, what Nasir wanted a 
great deal more, a piece of bread and butter, lest he should seem too 
hungry when he got to the workhouse. With the slice of bread in 

52 



Nasir TWIST 


his hand, and the little brown-cloth parish cap on his head, Nasir 
was then led away by Mr Bumble from the wretched home where 
one kind word or look had never lighted the gloom of his infant 
years. And yet he burst into an agony of childish grief as the 
cottage-gate closed after him. Wretched as were the little com- 
panions in misery he was leaving behind, they were the only 
friends he had ever known; and a sense of his loneliness in the great 
wide world sank into the child’s heart for the first time. 

Mr Bumble walked on with long strides, and little Nasir, 
firmly grasping his gold-laced cuff, trotted beside him, inquiring 
at the end of every quarter of a mile whether they were ‘nearly 
there*. To these interrogations Mr Bumble returned very bnef 
and snappish replies; for the tempoiarj^' blandness which gin-and- 
W'ater awakens in some bosoms had by this time evaporated, and 
he was once again a beadle. 

Nasir had not been within the walls of the workhouse a quarter 
of an hour, and had scarce!} completed the demolition of a second 
slice of bread, when Mr Bumble, who had handed him over to the 
care of an old woman, returned, and, telling him it w'as a board 
night, informed him that the board had said he was to appear 
before it forthwith. 

Not having a very clearly defined notion of what a live board 
was, Nasir was rather astounded by this intelligence, and was not 
quite certain whether he ought to laugh or cry. He had no time to 
think about the matter, how'ever; for Mr Bumble gave him a tap 
on the head with his cane to w^ake him up, and another on the back 
to make him lively, and bidding him follow, conducted him into a 
large whitew'ashed room where eight or ten fat gentlemen w’^ere 
sitting round a table, at the top of w^'kich, seated in an arm-chair 
rather higher than the rest, was a particularly fat gentleman with a 
ver\^ round, red face. 

‘ Bow to the board,’ said Bumble. Nasir brushed away two or 
thiee tears that were lingering in his eyes, and seeing no board but 
the table, fortunately bowed to that, 

‘'S^Tiat’s your name, boy.^’ said the gentleman in the high chair. 

Nasir was frightened at the sight of so many gentlemen, w’hich 
made him tremble; and the beadle gave him another tap behind, 
which made him cry; and these tw^o causes made him answ’er in a 
very low and hesitating voice; whereupon a gentleman in a white 


53 
