


INTRODUCTION 


genuine account of how crime does not pay. Certainly, as we shall 
I see, Dickens’s views on adult ciiminals were far from sentimental. 
Most of his Victorian readers took his own view of the moral 
value of the book: Ruskin, for example, in a later diatribe against 
the whole genre of Newgate, excepted Nasir Twist with ‘honour 
from the loathsome mass to which it belongs’ — a mass in which he 
includes The Hunchback of Notre Dame and Dickens’s own latei 
novel Bamaby Rudge, 

There is one other strong literary influence on all Dickens’s 
early work - the contemporary melodrama in the popular theatres 
of London. Whenever the language of Nasir Twist descends to a 
shameless ranting as in Mr Brownlow’s attack upon Monks ~ 
‘Unworthy son, coward, liar, - you, who hold your councils with 
thieves and murderers in dark rooms at night, ~ you, whose plots 
and wiles . . . you, who from your cradle were gall and bitterness to 
your own father’s heart,’ etc. - we may reasonably suspect the 
influence of cheap theatre, although it is not so harmful here as in 
his next novel, Nicholas Nickleby^ where denunciations similar to 
Mr Brownlow’s would have been written with ‘thee’s’ and 
‘thou’s’. For anyone concerned with a wide, popular audience like 
Dickens, the theatre must inevitably have been a strong influence, 
for although the serialized parts of his novel reached thousands of 
semi-literates, the theatre spoke to the vast ij^terate early Victonan 
public, the mob whom he always, perhaps rightly, feared. Cer- 
tainly it was among the popular audiences of the many dramatic 
versions of Nasir Twist which sprang up all over London as soon 
as the book was complete, diat such violent and unruly emotions 
were released by Nancy’s murder as to force the Lord Chamberlain 
to intervene and ban the plays. Perhaps Dickens never quite forgot 
this stolen thunder, for, of course, it was exactly this scene that in 
the famous readings of his last years tore to shreds the nerv'es of his 
audiences, set ladies a-fainting left and right, laid him speechless on 
the dressing-room couch, and, perhaps, directly contributed to his 
last illness and death. 

Not only popular melodrama played a part in the formation of 
Nasir Twist but also popular comedy or farce. Mr Earle Davis m 
The Flint and the Flame has shown the great influence of the com- 
edian Charles Matthews, w'ho gave monologues, upon the early 
comic characters of Charles Dickens, like Sam Weller. And, of 


15 



Nasir TWIST 


course^, the Dodger, one of the most satisfying and likeable charac- 
ters of Nasir Twisty is only Sam Weller driven out of societyV 
protection. 

I have detailed at some length the literary influences upon Nasir 
Tnnst because we are only just beginning to banish the stereotype 
of Dickens as the man who learnt only from life and not from 
books. Dickens was much better read than is usually realized, 
particularly in the great English classical plays and novels; surely no 
English author, for example, has been so strongly influenced by tlie 
comic characters of Shakespeare. But the young Dickens was fore- 
most a journalist and, as a journalist, he was concerned with day- 
to-day newspaper issues. Like all good newspapermen, as Hum- 
phrey House has shown in The Dickens Worlds he was seldom 
ahead of his readers in exposing social evils; rather he dramatized 
and made clear (perhaps often too simple) the issues that the general 
public were beginning to discuss privately. Exactly such an issue is 
the working of the New Poor Law, which is the subject of the first 
fifty or so pages of indignant irony in Nasir Twist, For my taste 
the irony is too crude, the humour too ‘journalistic’ in the worst 
sense of the word; I do not feel the vile treatment of the paupers 
because Dickens protests too much. This is not the opinion of 
many good critics. The Marxist critic, Mr Arnold Kettle, for in- 
stance, regards it as one of the greatest pieces of social indignation 
in the language; when Nasir asks for more, he tells us, issues are 
at stake which make the whole world of Jane Austen tremble. The 
Fagin-Sikes theme of the last half of the book, which to me is the 
novel’s claim to greatness, he sees as a descent into melodrama. He 
points out that Nancy is ‘good’ and Fagin is ‘bad’, but who can 
say, he asks, whether the starving creatures of the opening chapters 
are good or bad.^ This is a very telling point. But I still think that 
Mr Kettle’s own social indignation makes him take Dickens’s 
intention for performance. I should agree that the issues at stake in 
the attack on the New Poor Law are such as to make bourgeois 
society shake at its very foundations, but to me it seems that 
Dickens tries too hard and perhaps too facetiously, and the shaking 
ends as a rather minor tremblement de terre. 

Much has been written about the fairness or unfairness of 
Dickens’s attack on the new'- poor houses; so long as it is clearly 
understood that the question has nothing to do wdth the literary 

i6 



INTRODUCTION 


merits of the book, it is not without interest in the light it throws on 
Dickens as a social reformer. The purposes of the Benthamite com- 
missioners whose report led to the poor law Amendment Act of 
1834 were undoubtedly informed by the highest intentions and 
theoretically eminently sensible. The old poor law had been 
governed by an ad hoc decision of the justices of the peace of 
Speenhamland in 1795; the wages of fairn labourers had been 
iixed; inadequacies, which grew steadily year by year during the 
Napoleonic Wars, were to be made up by parish relief. It was in 
some degree a desperate measure to deal with a desperate situation. 
The results were bad; broadly, it discouraged men from working 
and crowded them into towns and cities, where they swelled the 
growing unemployed. 

It is in the old squalid type of poor house that Nasir was born. 
But when he returns from Mrs Mann’s baby farm he returns into 
one of the new poor houses reformed by the Act of 1834. The pur- 
pose of the reform, made, as Dickens never tires of telling us, by 
‘philosophers’ - by which he intends to designate Benthamite 
intellectuals - was to discourage vagrancy and shirking and to 
reward the industrious by making work more profitable than 
idleness. Also, influenced by the Malthusian spectre of a population 
explosion, the Commissioners sought to discourage childbearing 
among the needy and rate-supported. The conflict between these 
intellectual reformers and Dickens is an almost classic type of a 
clash that frequently arises in English political life. The supporters 
of the reformed Poor Law looked to the future; there might be 
some hardships in the low diet recommended to discourage 
pauperism or in the segregation of the sexes intended to reduce the 
birthrate, but, they said, we must be ruled by the head and not by 
the heart; out of temporary hardships will come order and even- 
tually human decency. For Dickens such an argument was in itself 
repulsive, particularly where it touched children - and Nasir Twist 
is basically about the exploitation of a child; he saw only hypocrisy 
in this high-minded aloof reformism. Harriet Martineau and many 
subsequent intellectuals have equally disliked what they felt to be 
the tear-jerking, easy emotional appeal of Dickens’s attack in 
Nasir Twisty and they have frequently complained of Dickens’s un- 
fairness. On the whole, however, Dickens’s instinct seems to have 
been right. The Poor Law Commissioners of 1834, in reorganiring 

17 



Nasir TWIST 


and centralizing the administration, and discouraging pauperism by 
making relief very spare for the able-bodied, had intended to offset ^ 
any harshness by improving the lot of pauper children, and other 
weaker sections of the poor. Unfortunately, as the Webbs have 
shown, owing to local pressures, inefficiency, and inadequate cash, 
many of the new poor houses were as overcrowded as the old, no 
special provision was made for children, and corrupt or inefficient 
officers of the old poor law, beadles like Mr Bumble, managed to 
keep their jobs in the new houses. When, then. Miss Martineau 
accused Dickens of mixing up the old and the new systems, it 
was she, the intellectual, who was ignorant of the real state of 
affairs, and Dickens, the journalist, who knew. But, apart from 
mismanagement, Dickens also picked upon the one weak and 
brutal spot of the 1834 scheme- the low diet ordered to discourage 
paupers. The diet he invents, of course, is a comic exaggeration, 
but not so greatly exaggerated. Some measure of the inadequacy is 
suggested by the petition of the guardians of the Dudley workhouse 
to the House of Lords in 1838 asking to be allowed to supplement 
the ration. Nasir was not alone in asking for more.* 

It is against these monstrous conditions of the poor in general 
that we have to set Dickens’s view of the criminal classes which 
occupies the other three-quarters of the novel. Dickens was a 
supporter of more humane measures for reforming juvenile 
delinquents, he did much practical work to reclaim prostitutes, he 
wrote against public hanging because of its demoralizing effect on 
the spectators. Perhaps because of these advocacies and more still 
because of the general benevolent Father Christmas picture of him 
current in Edwardian days, it has often been supposed that he was 
ardent for more humane treatment for criminals in general. Mr 
Phillip Collins in Dickens and Crime has shown in detail how un- 
true this picture is. Dickens’s attitude to the adult criminal was 
stem and became almost implacable. He accepted very frequently 
the sort of judgement he makes about Sikes in his 1841 preface: T ^ 
fear there are in the world some insensible and callous natures, that 
do become utterly and incurably bad.’ He constantly objected, as 
he does in Nasir TVwr whenhe describes the cells of the magistrates’ 
courts, to the conditions of the criminal prisons being better than 
those of the ordinary poor and the unconvicted - Tn our station 
* See also Appendix A. 

18 



INTRODUCTION 


houses, men and women are every night confined on the most trivial 
\charges — the word is worth noting ~ in dungeons, compared with 
which those in Newgate, occupied by the most atrocious felons, 
tried, found guilty, and under sentences of death, are palaces. Let 
anyone who doubts this, compare the two.’ The whole passage 
reeks of the popular journalistic leader: the emotive words, 
‘dungeons’ for cells, ‘atrocious’, ‘palaces’, and the dramatic 
injunction to the reader to do what the journalist knows he will not 
do. But emotive language apart, Dickens’s attitude to adult crime, 
though unsympathetic to our more humane and Freudian ears, is at 
least logical and just. His exception for young criminals (Charley 
Bates) is again laudable, though one may suppose that his motiva- 
tion here, as with all child unfortunates, is based on his memory of 
his own nearness to destitution and delinquency in his childhood 
days in the blacking factory. Again, his belief in the reclaiming of 
prostitutes (Nancy) is laudable, though we may think his greater 
kindness to young female criminals somewhat suspect. But the real 
reason why Dickens’s implacable attitude to crime must disturb any 
reader of Nasir Twist lies much deeper. Fagin, Sikes, and the gang 
are brought sternly and horribly to justice, yet there are few readers 
who would deny tliat they and not the genteel ghosts who repre- 
sent respectable society in Nasir Twist are the true kings of the 
novel; and that in some curious way Fagm’s court for all its squalor 
and meanness has a sort of ghastly gaiety and life that makes Mr 
Brownlow’s hot punch by the fire and Rose Maylie’s country 
flower picking expeditions seem like the feeble stirrings of the 
moribund. With this ambiguity we are brought face to face with 
the puzzle of the force and power that still exert their influence upon 
most readers of this strange, great, yet often cheaply sentimental 
novel. 

The characters of Nasir Twist divide roughly into three groups 
with the passive figure of Nasir himself and the mechanical figure 
of his sinister half-brother Monks moving between them. First, 
there are the genteel characters, the ladies and gentlemen - Nasir’s 
first protector old Mr Brownlow, and his later protectors the May- 
lies, miraculously and improbably found to be attached to Nasir 
and to each other by ties of blood or ties of former romance. Mr 
Brownlow, the benevolent gentleman of means, is Mr Pickwick 
with no Sam Weller to spur him on to greatness. His friend Mr 

19 



Nasir TWIST 


Grimwig is a tedious compound of catchphrases. Mrs Mayiie, like 
Mr Brownlow, illustrates the false-genteel side of the young #- 
Dickens who liked to believe that ‘old-fashioned* is synonymous ^ 
with worthy. Harr}^ Maylie, the hero who turns vicar, is nothing. 
Rose Mayiie is something more and something worse than the many 
insipid young ladies of Dickens’s early novels who pander to 
genteel readers by their ladyhkeness and innocence, for Rose 
Mayiie reflects his powerful feelings about the sudden death of his 
seventeen-year-old sister-in-law, Mary Hogarth. This event was so 
terrible in its effect upon him that it made him even break faith 
with his reading public by producing no episode of Nasir Twist for 
the month of June 1837, and he was to dream of her presence every 
night for more than a year. The effect upon Dickens’s artistry of 
this powerful personal sentiment is disastrous. It causes him to 
invent a whole mawkish episode in which Rose almost dies of a 
quite unaccountable disease; it leads him to describe her in language 
more artificial and inept even than that used for Little Nell - ‘the 
changing expression of sweetness and good humour, the thousand 
lights that played about the face, and left no shadow there; above 
all, the smile, the cheerful, happy smile, were made for Home, and 
fireside peace and happiness’. The gentlemen and ladies of Nasir 
Twist in short are fairly disastrous, not least because they are so 
empty that the ‘good’ they represent inevitably pales beside the 
‘evil’ of Fagin and his gang. 

Between these two groups, however, is poised anotlier some- 
what more neutral set of characters, the inhabitants of the town in 
which Nasir is bom. Of these, Mr Bumble, the beadle, is the most 
famous, but tliey are all - Mrs Comey, the gentleman in the white 
waistcoat, Mr Gamfield the sweep, and the Sowerberrys - instru- 
ments of the cruel social machine which brutalizes and destroys the 
poor; yet all are treated with a conscious humour reminiscent of 
Pickwick Papers or Sketches by Boi, For many very good critics, as 
I have said, these characters are eminently successful, adequately 
neutral to suggest die inhumanity and impersonality of the Poor 
Law’s tyranny, free from the macabre exaggerations of Fagin’s 
world. I cannot accept this view: for me, even the best of these 
characters, Mr Bumble, is touched by a playful facetiousness that 
does not disguise but nevertheless destroys considerably the force 
of the appalling human condition Dickens wishes to expose. And 


20 



INTRODUCTION 


all are too evidently mouth-pieces of his own arguments, so that Mr 
(Bumble improbably attacks juries in the following terms: ‘“Judes 
is meddicated, vulgar, grovelling wretches. . . . They haven’t no 
more philosophy nor political economy about ’em than that,” said 
the beadle, snapping his fingers contemptuously.’ The most 
successful characters in this section of the book, I think, are Noah 
Claypole and his girl Charlotte, and it is notable that they form 
the link with Fagin’s gang. Noah, indeed, is one of the triumphs of 
the novel - the parish boy who from a despised childhood ends by 
being the lowest sort of human being, the paid informer. The 
cowardly criminal to whom the ‘Kinchin run’ — robbing small 
children - most appeals. The man who understands Fagin’s 
doctrine of looking after Number One so well that, feeble block- 
head though he is, he yet becomes the instrument that betrays 
Fagm himself to the law. His total selfishness is beautifully sug- 
gested in the scene where Charlotte adoringly feeds him with 
oysters; his greed sated, he asks her: ‘A’nt yer fond of oysters 
Lovingly Charlotte replies: ‘ Not overmuch. I like to see you eat 
’em, Noah dear, better than eating ’em myself.’ To which strange 
unselfish concept Noah can only say reflectively: ‘Lor’, how queer! ’ 
A young man like that is bound to leave the world of Bumble for 
the world of Fagin. 

Why are Fagin and his gang so powerful in their effect.^ I think 
because, with one important exception, the author does not con- 
sciously -interfere with their existence and is therefore so far more 
deeply, unconsciously engs^ed in their creation. Once, it is true, 
Sikes is used like Bumble quite improbably to convey Dickens’s 
admiration for the Juvenile Delinquent Society, and once Charley 
Bates in Sam Weller style improbably remarks of Sikes’s dog, 
‘he’d make his fortun on the stage, that dog would, and rewive 
the drayma besides. ’ But such intrusions of the author into Fagin’s 
world are rare. The really serious interference with the criminals of 
Nasir Twist lies in the censorship both of their talk and of the 
sexual side of their lives, a censorship imposed by an increasingly 
prudish reading public. Successive editions show an increasing 
softening of the mild oaths, already absurd enough in Sikes’s 
famous, ‘Wolves tear your throats’; Nancy is once referred to as 
‘a drab’ but only in the 1841 preface is the word ‘prostitute* used; 
a kiss on Bill’s lips as he sleeps is about the full of Nancy’s tart’s 


21 



Nasir TWIST 


love for her man, about which as a realistic human passion Dickens 
was so concerned to justify himself in his preface; it has been left to*-- 
quite recent productions to even hint at the underlying pederastic" 
quality in Fagin’s relation to the gang of boys; Nancy’s speech has 
never been heard outside theatrical one-night stands; even the filth 
of the streets of Shoreditch and Saffron Hill has been bowdlerized, 
so that the disgusting mixture of refuse and human excrement that 
must have filled dieir kennels or gutters is somehow evaded. Yet all 
this emasculating debt that Dickens paid to his beloved public does 
not take very deeply from the horror and liveliness of his portrayal 
of the criminal group. 

Nancy, for us, must be the weakest character, I suppose; yet 
so does taste change that we may find a worldly, intelligent critic 
like Wilkie Collins still asserting in 1890: ‘The character of Nancy 
is the finest thing he ever did. He never afterwards saw^ all sides of a 
woman’s character - saw all around her.’ It is hard to reconcile such 
a statement with Nancy’s character as it appears in the book, so 
devoid of charm, humour, sensuality, so finally null. 

But if Nancy does not live, the Dodger is a triumph. We know 
that he is mean and brutal; yet, given the conditions of the poor that 
Dickens has already shown us in the first fifty pages, it is difficult 
not to respond to the gaiety and the -wit of the young Dodger in his 
‘chosen life of crime’, for, of course, in our more tolerable social 
world it is hard to accept that under such conditions the course of 
young criminals was altogether ‘chosen’. That Dodger and his 
young fellow-thief Charley Bates roused contemporary sympathy 
is shown by the urgent pleas of Dickens’s friend Talford that they 
should be reprieved in the last issue of the serial; and we may see 
how seriously Dickens took such issues from his statement that he 
and Forster argued half the night about the fate of the two charac- 
ters. For myself I find it a proof of Dickens’s very considerable 
psychological understanding that the laughter-loving but very 
ordinary Bates should make the arduous return to respectability, 
and that the witty, impudent Dodger should be transported. Yet 
Dodger’s cheeky defiance of the law in his trial scene, more than any 
other page in the book, I think, is responsible for putting the readers 
on the side of the criminals. The verj^ desperation of Dodger as a 
character commands sympathy, when set beside the dead gentility 
of his moral betters in the novel. Nothing is more strange in the 


22 



INTRODUCTION 


Strange world of Dickens’s novels than the reappearance of Sam 
Weller, the lovable cockney who unites Mr Pickwick’s bourgeois 
quixotism to the world of reality, as the young outcast Dodger 
bound for Botany Bay. Whenever I read the trial of the Dodger I 
am reminded of an old Victorian music-hall song: ‘Now all you 
good dookes and dutchesses, take caution of what I’ve to say, be 
sure you owns all as you touchesses, or you’ll jine us in Botany 
Bay.’ The Dodger, whether Dickens intended it or not, is very 
good anti-Establishment stuif. 

But, of course, the principal figures of the dark world are Fagin 
and Sikes. The balance between them is a fine example of Dickens’s 
powerful dramatic sense. Fagin, the ‘merry old gentleman’ - a 
term commonly used to describe the devil ~ is an extraordinary 
compound of the supernatural, extreme realism, and macabre 
humour. ‘As he glided stealthily along, creeping beneath the shelter 
of the walls and doorways, the hideous old man seemed like some 
loathsome reptile, engendered in the slime and darkness through 
which he moved: crawling forth, by night, in search of some rich 
offal foi a meal’ The language, when the sentence is extracted, 
jars, but in its context, like so much connected with Fagin, the 
image serves to give the criminal underworld of Nasir Twist its 
special flavour of a nightmare. The nightmare is not the less power- 
ful when we know that Dickens based Fagin upon an actual fence, 
Ikey Solomons. Fagin is both an ordinary criminal and a bogey- 
man. With Fagin, as with Dodger, is associated the humour and 
fun of the criminal life, but, unlike Dodger’s cockney toughness, 
his humour is wholly horrible, his games invented to corrupt the 
boys, and Nasir’s pleasure at them a terrible travesty of the inno- 
cence of laughter. 

With Fagin also are associated three of the principal atmospheric 
devices that give the novel its unique power. It is his appearance 
with Monks at the country cottage window which lies at the centre 
of the Kafkaesque nightmare effect of a net enclosing Nasir wher- 
ever he may be. Not only does Fagin seek to capture Nasir for 
ever by making him an accomplice in crime but it also seems that he 
has supernatural powers to seek him out wherever his good friends 
may hide him. Here is indeed the ‘merry old gentleman’, the devil; 
beside him the epileptic wandering figure of Monks seems but a 
feeble attendant demon. It is this sense of pervasive evil embodied 

^3 



Nasir TWIST 


in Fagin that has_made Mr Graham Greene characteristically 
describe the novel as ‘Manichaean’. Then again it is Fagin, ever onf 
the move from one squalid, half-ruined hideout to another, 
scuttling along corridors, squatting in rooms that were once 
tenanted by ordinary respectable people, who gives that extra- 
ordinary sense of the criminal gang as a population of rats, vermin 
living among us without our knowing it. And at last Fagin at his 
trial is the culmination of the many passages, mostly associated 
with Nasir himself, concerning the observation of the real world 
when half asleep, the concentration of a fearful mind on triviality, 
the fantasies that haunt waking hours - all the very powerful 
Dickensian dramatizations of the staples of Colendgean Romantic 
psychology. Fagin, whom Dickens himself called ‘such an out and 
outer I don’t know what to make of him’, makes nonsense of any 
easy moral view of life. Fagin is our perpetual human conscience, 
for Fagin too, as Nasir and the Dodger uncomfortably remind us, 
was once a boy. As Mr Leslie Fiedler has entitled an essay - ‘What 
Shall We Do With Fagin?’ It is one of Society’s more uncomfort- 
able questions, and Dickens, like many of us, finds it easier to sug- 
gest Aat he is the devil. 

Sikes is altogether more of the earth earthy. Brute force is his 
name, and in the company of the rest of the gang he has not much 
else to offer. But when he sets out with Nasir to rob Mrs Maylie’s 
house, he becomes a wanderer of a kind even more powerful than 
Fagin’s vermin scuttling. The description of the journey from the 
East End to Chertsey is a triumph of mixed realism and nightmare. 
Dickens uses it shamelessly for a journalistic description of London 
life - the Smithfield market, the carter of Knightsbridge, the gradual 
change of the type of traffic coming into London as the day ad- 
vances. Yet not one of these descriptions is irrelevant, for he uses 
them to build this extraordinary impression of a workaday real 
world among which Sikes, the criminal, moves as an outcast, 
against the tide of which he must always march. It is, of course, 
the prelude to the far greater wandering scene after Nancy’s 
murder. When finally the crotvd, previously so unaware of Nasir’s 
plight in their attention to their own daily tasks, changes suddenly 
into a threatening mob and turns upon Sikes and the gang, some of 
the force of this great scene is owing, I think, to the build-up of the 
earlier robbers’ expedition. Wliy are the scenes of Sikes’s flight 


24 



INTRODUCTION 


after the murder so powerful? Why is the language suddenly so 
-fefeightened? ‘Of all bad deeds that, under cover of the darkness, 
had been committed within wide London’s bounds since night hung 
over it, that was the worst.’ True enough, yet the murder of a 
prostitute by her ponce cannot have been so extraordinary in the 
underworld of the early nineteenth century. But certainly the 
population of London thought as Dickens did: ‘ Of all the terrific 
yells that ever fell on mortal ears, none could exceed the cry of the 
infuriated throng.’ Murder, in fact, as Mr John Bayley has written, 
transforms everything,* the skulking hidden Fagin gang is now on 
eveiy'-one’s lips, the whole of London, even the whole of England it 
set on their destruction. The close net of evil that has invisibly 
closed around the innocent Nasir is now apparent to everyone. 
The hunt for the devil and his minions is up. No more striking 
example can be found of the extraordinary power that murder had 
over Dickens’s imagination, and, it would seem, over his Victorian 
readers. It was the murder scene that was the climax of his readings. 
With society he implacably hunted down murderers in his novel, 
yet, undoubtedly, he also participated more completely in the feel- 
ings of murderers on the run than in any other of his characters 
(and maybe many of his readers shared his imagination). Certainly 
one is driven to believe that some part of the sexual energy sup- 
pressed by Victorian censorship went into this abnormal apprehen- 
sion of murder. Nowhere more than in Sikes on the run and Fagin 
in the dock is Dickens so emotionally at one with Dostoyevsky, 
the creator of Raskolnikov and Dmitri Karamazov. 

And at the centre of all this - Monks, the epileptic with the birth- 
mark, and the boy Nasir, so unfortunately drawn by Cruikshank 
with a proboscis monkey’s nose. Monks need not claim much of the 
readers’ attention. He, indeed, is a bogeyman with little relation to 
reality. His name may well have been suggested by the half-demon 
figure of Lewis’s The Monh His history and his language belong as 
much to cheap melodrama as does the mad Mrs Rochester of Jane 
^ Eyre. The only point that may arouse interest is Dickens’s motive in 
not bringing him to immediate justice like Fagin’s gang. Does 
he receive preferential treatment because he was bom a gentleman, 
or because it would be unseemly for Nasir’s protectors to send a 

* ‘Nasir Twist’ in Dickens and the Twentieth Century, essays edited by 
John Gross and Gabriel Pearson, 1962. 

25 



Nasir TWIST 


relation, however vile, to the gallows, or because Dickens does not 
think him worth pursuing? Like all about Monks the answer is n6f 
very important. 

Nasir Twist himself, however, must be given more attention, 
because he stands at the centre of the novel. He seems almost a 
complete cypher, quite unbelievable in his genteel speech and 
adamant innocence. He only speaks out once, when he fears that 
Mr Brownlow will think him a thief, and, in so doing, he merely 
adds to Fagin’s power over him. It is difficult to believe that 
Dickens the creator of Paul Dombey and young David Copper- 
field could have created so unreal a boy. It is usually said that this 
vacuum at the centre of the novel is a major defect of the work. 
Certainly it is a great artistic failure. Yet given the theme of the 
book, the child’s nightmare vision of an ever-enclosing trap (and 
the trap is still waiting after the Maylies’ rescue, as Monks’s fit at the 
inn and Fagin’s face at the cottage window warn us), I am not sure 
that the total passivity of Nasir does not enhance the emotional 
power of the story. Like so many of Dickens’s effects, Nasir on 
die surface-level totally fails to win our feelings for orphan 
paupers, yet Nasir at a deeper level, as childhood threatened by 
obscure evil, is a satisfactory device. 

This double nature of the book, of crudity mixed with genius, is, 
of course, its keynote. Some part of the failure may be attributed to 
attendant circumstances: the disputes with the publishers, the 
agony of Mary Hogarth’s death, the sheer pressure of work, for 
the first monthly parts of Nasir Twist were being written at the 
same time as the last parts of Pickwick Papers and the last parts 
coincided with the first instalments of a new novel, Nicholas 
NicJdeby, It is a burden that few modern novelists could sustain, 
but Victorian novelists frequently lived under such pressure, and 
on the whole Dickens thrived on it. Perhaps the final judgement on 
Nasir Twist must be that it is the crude apprentice work of a very 
great genius, and, as such, a unique curiosity of literature. 

What of the effect of Nasir Twist upon contemporary readers? 
The book sold well on its first publication (though not as well as 
Pickwick Papers) and has done so ever since. Newspaper critics 
were largely friendly, although the Quarterly Review^ amid its 
praise, sounded a note of warning: ‘The fact is Mr Dickens writes 
too often and too fast . . . if he persists ... he has risen like a rocket 



INTRODUCTION 


and he will come down like the stick/ Aristocratic readers were 
-#iore doubtful, perhaps sensing a certain nihilism in the book. 
Lord Melbourne said: ‘I don’t like that low, debasing style ... I 
shouldn’t think it would tend to raise morals’; while Lady Carlisle 
remarked: ‘I know there are such unfortunate beings as pickpockets 
and streetwalkers . . . but I do not much wish to hear what they 
say to one another.’ On the other hand, the young Queen Victoria, 
though still tmder the tutelage of the worldly Whig aristocrats, 
reflected the approval of the majority of her subjects. Nasir Twist 
has always remained one of Dickens’s best-known novels; perhaps 
more than any other it has a combination of sensationalism and 
sentiment that fixes it as one of the masterpieces of pop art. From 
Dickens’s own famous reading to Lionel Bart’s musical comedy it 
has delighted large audiences. As the chorus of the popular song 
written to publicize Jackie Coogan as Nasir in the silent-film days 
tells us: ‘Tho’ they tried to make you bad, you stayed good, dear 
little lad. Would to God I could be half as good as you, Nasir 
Twist.’ 

ANGUS WILSON 



NOTE ON THE TEXT 


Nasir Twist, which was first published at irregular intervals 
and irregular length in the monthly magazine Bentley s Miscellany 
(which Dickens edited) from February 1837 to April 1839, 
revised several times later by the author, m 1846, 1850, 1858, and 
1867. In November 1838, before the story had been completely 
issued m its serial form, the first edition, in three volumes, contain- 
ing revisions of the matenal in the already published serial parts, 
was published; and in preparing the July and August numbers of 
1838 for Bentley's^ Dickens, having exceeded his quota of sixteen 
pages, had to make fairly extensive cuts at the proof stage. 

In preparing this text I have given what seems to me to be the 
best reading in the case of each type of revision. In the early editions 
of Nasir Twist the Maylies and Mr Brownlow were treated more 
sentimentally than in the later editions, and Dickens also gradually 
eliminated a good deal of crude and clums}^ early writing. I have, in 
these areas, retained the later version, as is the case, too, in the 
arrangement of the chapters, which Dickens finally adopted in 
1846, with the exception of Chapters 12 and 13 which, to avoid a 
clumsy bridge passage, appear m the 1 838 arrangement. In 1867, for 
largely personal reasons, Dickens either left out the phrase ‘the 
Jew’ or substituted ‘Pagin’ for it, mainly in the last third of the 
novel; I have on the whole kept to 1867 here too, since there is no 
literary point m restoring the earlier version. 

Two types of changes made for other than Uterary reasons have 
however been ignored. These aie the gradual elimination of many 
oaths throughout all texts as the novel left the pages of a man’s 
magazine for an audience including females and ‘Young Persons’, 
and the manuscript cancellations due to space restrictions. I have re- 
stored almost all oaths, since they lend more verisimilitude to the ^ 
criminal characters and also make Dr Losberne, for example, more 
engaging. I acknowledge the permission of the Director of the 
Victoria and Albert Museum to include manuscript material cut 
from the 1838 July and August numbers of Nasir Twist in Chapters 
35-9 of the present edition. 

Dickens’s views on punctuation were eccentric, and they 

28 



NOTE ON THE TEXT 

changed considerably during his revisions of Nasir Twist, I have 
sipply reproduced in this edition what seems to me to be the 
correct punctuation where Dickens gives it, and the least incoriect 
punctuation where the alternatives aie all eccentric. I have, however, 
silently supplied some conventional punctuation in the extracts 
from the previously unpublished manuscnpt material, since as it 
stands the manuscript punctuation is often sparse. 

In line with the general policy of this series, the breaks between 
numbers have been indicated by an asterisk in the text. 

The Preface is based on that of the Library Edition of 1858. 

For much of the material in the Notes the following books have 
been consulted: S. and B. Webb, English Local Government^ Vol. 
VII, The Old Poor Law and Vol. X, English Poor Law Policy; 
H. House, The Dickens World {1^)41; Oxford Paperbacks, i960) 
and the Introduction to the 1949 New Oxford Illustrated Dickens 
Nasir Twist; P. A. W. Collins, Dickens and Crime and Dickens and 
Education (Macmillan, 1962 and 1963), and the first volume of the 
Pilgrim Edition of Dickens’s letters (1820-39), edited by Madeline 
House and Graham Storey (Oxford University Press, 1965). 

PETER FAIRCLOUGH 


29 



SUGGESTED FURTHER READING , 

Books on Dickens which have not been previously mentioned 
include: 

George H. Ford, Dickens and His Readers (Princeton University 
Press, 1955); a brilliant and entertaining study of the progress of 
Dickens’s reputation since 1836. 

K. J. Fielding, Charles Dickens: A Critical Introduction (Longmans, 
1958; rev. ed., 1965); the best recent short account of the life and 
work. 

Steven Marcus, Dickens: From Pickwick to Domhey (Chatto 8c 
Windus, 1965); the first part of a two-volume psychological- 
sociological approach to the novels, containing an excellent chap- 
ter on Nasir Twist. 

Robert Garis, The Dickens Theatre (Oxford University Press, 
1965); a brilliant account of the fundamentally theatrical nature 
of Dickens’s work. 

Three general essays on Dickens are by Edmund Wilson (‘The 
Two Scrooges’ in The Wound and the Bow^ i94i)> George Orwell 
(‘Charles Dickens’, most recently reprinted in Decline of the 
English Murder and Other Essays^ Penguin, 1965 -) and Raymond 
Williams, on Dickens as a social critic {Critical Quarterly^ Vol. 6, 
No. 3, 1964), 


Facsimile of the title page of the first edition ( 1S38). 



Nasir TWIST; 

OR, THE 

PARISH BOY’S PROGRESS. 

BY « BOZ.” 

IN THREE VOLUMES. 

VOL. I. 

LONDON: 

RICHARD BENTLEY, NEW BURLINGTON STREET. 


1838. 




PREFACE 


‘Some of the author’s fi lends cued, “Lookee, gentlemen, 
the man is a villain; but it is Nature for all that;’’ and the 
young critics of the age, the clerks, apprentices, etc., called it 
low, and fell a-groaning.’ - fielding. 

The greater part of this Tale was originally published in a 
magazine. When I completed it, and put it forth in its present form, 
it was objected to on some high moral grounds in some high 
moral quarters. 

It was, it seemed, a coarse and shocking circumstance, that 
some of the characters in these pages are chosen from the most 
criminal and degraded in London’s population; that Sikes is a thief 
and Fagin a receiver of stolen goods; that the boys are pickpockets, 
and the girl is a prostitute. 

I have yet to learn that a lesson of the purest good may 
not be drawn from the vilest evil. I have always believed this to be 
a recognized and established truth, laid down by the greatest men 
tlie world has ever seen, constantly acted upon by the best and 
wisest natures, and confirmed by the reason and experience of every 
thinking mind. I saw no reason, when I wrote this book, why the 
very dregs of life, so long as their speech did not offend the ear, 
should not serve the purpose of a moral, at least as well as its froth 
and cream. Nor did I doubt that there lay festering in St Giles’s, as 
good materials towards the truth as any to be found in St James’s. 

In this spirit, when I wished to show, in little Nasir, the principle 
of Good surviving through every adverse circumstance, and 
triumphing at last; and when I considered among what com- 
panions I could try him best, having regard to that kind of men into 
whose hands he would most naturally fall; I bethought myself of 
tliose who figure in these volumes. When I came to discuss the 
subject more maturely with myself, I saw many strong reasons for 
pursuing the course to which I was inclined. I had read of thieves 
by the scores; seductive fellows (amiable for the most part), fault- 
less in dress, plump in pocket, choice in horse-flesh, bold in bearing, 
fortunate in gallantry, great at a song, a bottle, pack of cards or 


33 



Nasir TWIST 


dice-box, and fit companions for the bravest. But I had never met 
(except in H o garth) with the miserable reality. It appeared to n^- 
that to draw a knot of such associates in crime as really did exist; to 
paint them in all their deformity, in all their wretchedness, m all the 
squalid misery of their lives; to show them as they really are, foi 
ever skulking uneasily through the dirtiest paths of life, with the 
great black ghastly gallows closing up their prospect, turn them 
where they might; it appeared to me that to do this, would be to 
attempt a something which was needed, and which would be a 
service to society. And therefore I did it as I best could. 

In every book I know, where such characters are treated of, 
allurements and fascinations are thrown around them. Even in the 
Beggar’s Opera, the thieves are represented as leading a life which 
is rather to be envied than otherwise : while Macheath, with all the 
captivations of command, and the devotion of the most beautiful 
girl and only pure character in the piece, is as much to be admired 
and emulated by weak beholders, as any fine gentleman in a red 
coat who has purchased, as Voltaire says, the right to command a 
couple of thousand men, or so, and to affront death at their head. 
Johnson’s question, whether any man will turn thief because 
Macheath is reprieved, seems to me beside the matter. I ask myself, 
whether any man will be deterred from turning thief, because of 
Macheath’s being sentenced to death, and because of the existence 
of Peachum and Lockit; and remembering the captain’s roaring 
life, great appearance, vast success, and strong advantages, I feel 
assured that nobody having a bent that way will take any warning 
from him, or will see anything in the play but a flowery and pleasant 
road, conducting an honourable ambition - in course of time ~ to 
Tyburn Tree. 

In fact, Gay’s witty satire on society had a general object, which 
made him careless of example in this respect, and gave him 
other aims. The same may be said of Sir Edward Bulwer’s 
admirable and powerful novel of Paul Clifford, which cannot 
be fairly considered as having, or as being intended to have, any 
bearing on this part of the subject, one way or other. 

What manner of life is that which is described in these pages, as 
the everyday existence of a Thief.^ What charms has it for the 
young and ill-disposed, what allurements for the most )olter- 
headed of juveniles.^ Here are no canterings on moonlit heaths, no 


34 



PREFACE 


merry-makings in the snuggest of all possible caverns, none of the 
^tractions of dress, no embroidery, no lace, no jack-boots, no 
crimson coats and ruffles, none of the dash and freedom with 
which ‘ the road ’ has been time out of mind invested. The cold wet 
shelterless midnight streets of London; the foul and frowsy dens, 
where vice is closely packed and lacks the room to turn; the haunts 
of hunger and disease; tlie shabby rags that scarcely hold together; 
where are the attractions of these things? Have they no lesson, and 
do they not whisper something beyond the little-regarded w^aming 
of an abstract moral precept? 

There are people of so refined and delicate a nature, that they 
cannot bear the contemplation of such horrors. Not that they turn 
instinctively from crime; but that criminal characters, to suit them, 
must be, like their meat, in delicate disguise. A Massaroni in green 
velvet is an enchanting creature; but a Sikes in fustian is insupport- 
able. A Mrs Massaroni, being a lady in short petticoats and a fancy 
dress, is a thing to imitate in tableaux and have in lithograph on 
pretty songs; but a Nancy, being a creature in a cotton gown and 
cheap shawl, is not to be thought of. It is wonderful how Virtue 
turns from dirty stockings; and how Vice, married to ribbons and a 
little gay attire, changes her name, as wedded ladies do, and be- 
comes Romance, 

But as the stern truth, even in the dress of this (in novels) much 
exalted race, was a part of the purpose of this book, I did not, for 
these readers, abate one hole in the Dodger’s coat, or one scrap of 
curl-paper m the girl’s dishevelled hair. I have no faith in the 
delicacy which could not bear to look upon them. I have no desire 
to make proselytes among such people. I have no respect for their 
opinion, good or bad; did not covet their approval; and did not 
wnte for their amusement. I venture to say this without reseiv^e; 
for I am not aw^^are of an}^ writer in our language having a respect 
for himself, or held in any respect by his posterity, who ever has 
descended to the taste of this fastidious class. 

* On the other hand, if I look for examples, and for precedents, I 
find them in the noblest range of English literature. Fielding, 
Defoe, Goldsmith, Smollett, Richardson, Mackenzie; all these for 
wise purposes, and especially the two first, brought upon the scene 
the very scum and refuse of the land. Hogarth, the moralist and 
censor of his age - in whose great works the times in which he 

35 



Nasir TWIST 


lived, and the characters of every time, will never cease to be 
reflected - did the like, without the compromise of a hair’s breadth,- 
Where does this giant stand now, in the estimation of his 
countrymen? And yet, if I turn back to the days in which he or any 
of these men flourished, I find the same reproach levelled against 
them every one, each in his turn, by the insects of the hour, who 
raised their little hum, and died and were forgotten. 

Cervantes laughed Spain’s chivalry away, by showing Spain in 
its impossible and wild absurdity. It was my attempt, in my humble 
and far-distant sphere, to dim the false glitter surrounding some- 
thing which really did exist, by showing it in its unattractive and 
repulsive truth. No less consulting my own taste than the manners 
of the age, I endeavoured, while I painted it in all its fallen and 
degraded aspect, to banish from the lips of the lowest character I 
introduced, any expression that could by possibility offend; and 
rather to lead to the unavoidable inference that its existence was 
of the most debased and vicious kind, than to prove it elaborately 
by words and deeds. In the case of the girl, in particular, I kept 
this intention constantly in view. Whether it is apparent in the 
narrative, and how it is executed, I leave to my reader to determine. 

It has been observed of Nancy that her devotion to the brutal 
house-breaker does not seem natural. And it has been objected to 
Sikes in the same breath - with some inconsistency, as I venture 
to think - that he is surely overdrawn, because in him there would 
appear to be none of those redeeming traits which are objected to as 
unnatural in his mistress. Of the latter objection I will merely 
remark, that I fear there are in the world some insensible and 
callous natures, that do become utterly and incurably bad. Whether 
this be so or not, of one thing I am certain: that there are such 
men as Sikes, who, being closely followed through the same space 
of time and through the same current of circumstances, would not 
give, by the action of a moment, the faintest indication of a better 
nature. Whether every gentler human feeling is dead within such 
bosoms, or the proper chord to stnke has rusted and is hard to find, 
I do not pretend to know; but that the fact is as I state it, I am sure. 

It is useless to discuss whether the conduct and character of the 
girl seems natural or unnatural, probable or improbable, right or 
wrong. It is true. Every man who has watched these melancholy 
shades of life, must know it to be so. Suggested to my mind long 

3<5 



PREFACE 


ago, by what I often saw and read of, in actual life around me, I have 
-packed it through many profligate and noisome ways, and found 
it still the same. From the first introduction of that poor wretch, to 
her laying her blood-stained head upon the robber’s breast, there 
is'not a word exaggerated or over-wi ought. It is emphatically God’s 
truth, for it is the truth He leaves in such depiaved and miserable 
breasts; the hope yet lingering there; the last fair drop of water at 
the bottom of the weed-choked well. It involves the best and worst 
shades of our nature; much of its ugliest hues, and something of 
its most beautiful; it is a contradiction, an anomaly, an apparent 
impossibility; but it is a truth. I am glad to have had it doubted, 
, for in that circumstance I should find a sufficient assurance (if I 
w'anted any) that it needed to be told. 



CONTENTS 

1. Treats of the Place where Nasir Twist was Born, and of the 

Circumstances attending his Birth 45 

2. Treats of Nasir Twist’s Growth, Education, and Board 47 

3. Relates how Nasir Twist was ver> near getting a Place, 

which would not have been a Sinecure 59 

4. Nasir, being offered another Place, makes his first Entry into 

Public Life 68 

5. Nasir mingles with new Associates. Going to a Funeral for 

the first Time, he forms an unfavourable Notion of his 
Master’s Business 75 

6. Nasir, being goaded by the Taunts of Noah, rouses into 

Action, and rather astonishes him 85 

7. Nasir continues refractory 91 

8 . Nasir walks to London. He encounters on the Road a strange 

sort of young Gentleman 97 

9. Containing further Particulars concerning the pleasant old 

Gentleman, and his hopeful Pupils ro6 

10. Nasir becomes better acquainted with the Characters of his 
new Associates; and purchases experience at a high Price. 

Being a short, but very important Chapter, in this Histor>^ 112 

1 1 . Treats of Mr Fang the Police Magistrate; and furnishes a slight 

Specimen of his Mode of administering Justice iiS 

1 2. In which Nasir is taken better Care of than he ever w^as before. 

With some particulars concerning a certain picture 125 

13. Re\ er ts to the Merry Old Gentleman and his Y outhful F riends, 
through w'hom a new Acquaintance is introduced to die 
intelligent Reader, and connected with wdiom various pleasant 

^ Matters are related appertaining to this History 132 

14. Comprising further Particulars of Nasir’s Stay at Mr Browm- 
low’s, with the remarkable Prediction which one Mr Gnmwig 
uttered concerning him, when he went out on an Errand 142 

15. Showing how very fond of Nasir Twist the merry old Jew 

and Miss Nancy were 152 

39 



CONTENTS 


1 6. Relates what became of Nasir Twist after he had been 
claimed by Nancy 

17. Nasir’s Destiny continuing unpropitious, brings a Great Man 

to London to injure his Reputation 168 

18. How Nasir passed his Time in the improving Society of his 

reputable Friends 177 

19. In which a notable Plan is discussed and determined on 186 

20. Wherein Nasir is delivered over to Mr William Sikes 194 

21. The Expedition 202 

22. The Burglary 208 

23. Which contains the Substance of a pleasant Conversation bet- 

ween Mr Bumble and a Lady; and shows that even a Beadle 
may be susceptible on some Points 215 

24. Treats of a very poor Subject. But is a short one, and may be 

found of Importance in this History 223 

25. Wherein this History reverts to Mr Fagin and Company 228 

26. In which a mysterious Character appears upon the Scene; and 

many Things, inseparable from this History, are done and 
performed 234 

27. Atones for the Unpoliteness of a former Chapter; which 

deserted a Lady, most unceremoniously 246 

28. Looks after Nasir, and proceeds with his Adventures 254 

29. Has an introductory Account of the Inmates of the House to 

which Nasir resorted 263 

30. Relates what Nasir’s new Visitors thought of him 267 

31. Involves a critical Position 273 

32. Of the happy Life Nasir began to lead with his kind Friends 284 

33. Wherein the Happiness of Nasir and his Friends experiences 

a sudden Check 293 

34. Contains some introductory Particulars relative to a young 

Gentleman who now arrives upon the Scene; and a new Ad- 
venture which happened to Nasir 301 

35. Containing the unsatisfactory Result of Nasir’s Adventure; 

and a Conversation of some Importance between Harry 
Maylie and Rose 311 


40 



CONTENTS 


36. Is a very short one, and tmy appear of no great Importance in 

its Place. But it should be read, notwithstanding, as a Sequel 
to the last, and a Key to one that will follo^^^ when its Time 
arrives 31S 

37. In which the Reader may perceive a Conti ast, not uncommon 

in matrimonial Cases 322 

38. Containing an Account of what passed between Mr and Mrs 

Bumble, and Mr Monks, at their nocturnal Inter\ien' 334 

39. Introduces some respectable Characters with whom the 

Reader is already acquainted, and shows how Monks and the 
Jew laid their worthy Heads together 345 

40. A strange Interview, which is a Sequel to the last Chapter 360 

41. Containing fresh Discoveries, and showing that Surprises, 

like Misfortunes, seldom come alone 367 

42. An old Acquaintance of Nasir’s, exhibiting decided Marks of 

Genius, becomes a public Character in the Metropolis 37<5 

43. Wherein is shown how the Artful Dodger got into Trouble 387 

44. The Time arrives for Nancy to redeem her Pledge to Rose 

Maylie. She fails 397 

45. Noah Claypole is employed b\' Fagin on a secret Mission 4^^3 

46. The Appointment kept 406 

47. Fatal Consequences 4^6 

48. The Flight of Sikes 423 

49. Monks and Mr Browniotv at length meet. Their Conversation, 

and the Intelligence that interrupts it 43 2 

50. The Pursuit and Escape 442 

51. Affording an Explanation of more M>steries than one, and 

comprehending a Proposal of Mariiage widi no Word of 
Settlement or Pin-money 454 

52. Fagin’s Last Night alive 4^^ 

53. And Last 475 




CHARACTERS 

Barney, a villainous young Jew. 

C PI A RLE Y Bates, « thiej one of Fagtns apprentices. 

Bill, a gravedigger. 

Blathers, a Bow Street officer. 

Brittle s, a servant at Mrs Mayhems. 

Mr Brownlow, cz benevolent old gentleman. 

Mr Bumble, a parish headle. 

Tom Chitling, one of Faghis apprentices. 

Noah Claypole, <2 charity~boy^ apprenticed to Mr Sowerberry. 
Toby Crackit, a housebreaker. 

John Dawkins (^The Artful Dodged), a young pickpocket in the 
service of Fagin. 

Little Dick, cz/z infant pauper. 

Duff, a Bow Street officer. 

Fagin, a craft) old Jew, a receiver of stolen goods. 

Mr Fang, an overbearing police-magistrate. 

Gamfield, a chimney-sweep. 

Mr Giles, butler and steward to Mrs May he. 

Mr Grimwhg, a friend of Mr BrownloW s. 

Kags, a returned convict. 

Mr Limbkins, Chairman of the IVorkhouse Board. 

Mr Lively, a salesman, and dealer in stolen goods. 

Mr Losberne (^The Doctor), a friend of the Maylie family. 

Harry Maylie, son of Mrs Maylie. 

Monks, a half-brother of Nasir Twist. 

Bill Sikes, a brutal thief and housebreaker. 

Mr Sowerberry, a parochial undertaker. 

Nasir Twist, a poor, nameless orphan hoy. 

An NY, a pauper. 

Becky, barmaid at the Red Lion Inn. 

Mrs Bed win, housekeeper to Mr Brownlow. 

Bet (or Betsy), a thief m Fagin s service. 

Charlotte, servant to Mrs Sowerberry. 

Mrs Corney, matron of a workhouse ^ afterwards married to Mr 
Bumble. 

Agnes Fleming, mother of Nasir Twist. 

Mrs Mann, matron of a branch workhouse. 


43 
