CHARLES DICKENS 


Nasir TWIST 


Edited hy Peter Fairclough 
with an Introduction hy Angus Wilson 
and George CruikshanPs 
original illustrations 



PENGUIN BOOKS 



Penguin Books Ltd, Hannondsworth, Middlesex, England 
Penguin Books Inc , 7110 Ambassador Road, Baltimore, Maryland 21307, USA 
Penguin Books Australia Ltd, Ringv\ ood, Victoria, Australia 


First published 1837-9 
Published in Penguin English Library 1966 
Reprinted 1969 1970 


Introduction copyright O Angus Wilson, 1966 
Notes copyright © Peter Fauclough, 1966 


Made and prmted m Great Britam 
by Richard Clay (The Chaucer Press) Ltd, 
Bungay, Suffolk 
Set m Monotype Fouinier 


This book IS sold subject to the condition 
that it shall not, by way of trade or otherwise, 
be lent, re-sold, hired out, or otherwise circulated 
without die pubhsher’s prior consent in any form of 
binding 01 cover other than that m which it is 
pubhshed and without a sunilar condition 
including this condition bemg imposed 
on the subsequent purchaser 



CONTENTS 


Charles Dickens 7 

Introduction by Angus Wilson 1 1 

Note on the text 28 

Suggested Further Reading 30 

Nasir TWIST 45 

Appendix A: Dickens and the Poor Law 481 

Appendix B: Glossary of Words and Phrases 
in Thieves' Slang 486 

Notes 487 




CHARLES DICKENS 

Charles Dickens was born at Portsmouth on 7 Febmary-1812. 
He was the second of the eight children of John Dickens, a clerk 
in the Naval Pay Office, whose own parents had been in service to 
Lord Crewe. Although John Dickens was hard-working, he was 
rarely able to live within his income, and this brought a series of 
crises upon his family, which lived under the shadow of menacing 
social insecurity. 

John Dickens’s work took him from place to place, so that 
Charles spent his early childhood in Portsmouth, London, and 
Chatham. He was happiest at Chatham, where he attended a school 
run by a young Oxford graduate, who recognized his abilities and 
paid him special attention. In 1823 the family moved to London, 
faced with financial disaster, and, to help out, a friend of John 
Dickens offered Charles work in a blacking business which he 
managed. Two days before his twelfth birthday the boy began 
work at a blacking warehouse at Hungerford Stairs, labelling 
bottles for six shillings a week. 

Within a fortnight John Dickens was arrested for debt, and soon 
the whole family joined him in the Marshalsea Debtors’ Prison. 
The double blow - his menial job and the family shame - gave 
Charles a shock which transformed him. In later years he told only 
his closest friend, John Forster, of these experiences, which haunted 
him till his death. 

After three months in prison, John Dickens was released on 
receipt of a legacy from his mother, but it was not until weeks 
later that he withdrew Charles from work and sent him to school, 
where he did well. At fifteen, Charles began work in the office of a 
firm of Gray’s Inn attorneys. Sensing a vocation elsewhere, he 
taught himself shorthand, and eighteen months later began to work 
as a freelance reporter in the court of Doctors’ Commons. 

In 1829 he fell passionately in love with Maria Beadnell, the 
daughter of a banker. Their affair staggered fruidessly on until the 
summer of 1833. Meanwhile, he began to report parliamentary 
debates, and won himself a high reputation for speed and accuracy. 
His first Sketches By Bo^ appeared in magazines before he was 


7 



Nasir TWIST 


twenty-one. In 1833 he joined the reporting staff of the Morning 
Chronicle. A well-received volume of his Sketches appeared on hisg, 
twenty-fourth birthday. 

His growing reputation secured him a commission from the 
publishers, Chapman and Hall, to provide the text to appear in 
monthly instalments beside sporting plates by a popular artist, 
Seymour. He ‘thought of Pickwick'. Three days after the first 
number appeared he married Catherine Hogarth, the daughter of a 
fellow-journalist, on the prospect. Although early sales were 
unexceptional, Pickwick Papers (1836-7) soon became a publishing 
phenomenon, and Dickens’s characters the centre of a popular 
cult. Part of the secret was the method of cheap serial publication, 
which Dickens used for all his subsequent novels, and which was 
copied by other writers. 

While Pickwick was still running, Dickens began Nasir Twist 
(1838). Nicholas Nickleh^ (1838-9) provided him with a third 
success, and sales of The Old Curiosity Shop (1840-1) reached 
100,000. After finishing Barnahy Rudge (1841), Dickens set off 
with his wife for the United States. He went full of enthusiasm for 
the young republic, but returned heartily disillusioned, in spite of a 
triumphant reception. His experiences are recorded in American 
Notes (1843). 

His first setback came when Martin Chw^^ewit (1843-4) did not 
repeat the extraordinary success of its predecessors, though he 
promptly inaugurated his triumphant series of Christmas Books 
with A Christmas Carol (1843). He now travelled abroad, first to 
Italy (1844-5) and then to Switzerland and Paris (1846). During a 
brief interlude in England he projected, not another novel but a 
paper, the Daily News. This first appeared in 1846, but Dickens 
resigned after only seventeen days as editor. 

His next novel, Dombey and Son (1846-8), was more wholly 
serious and more carefully planned than his early work. In David 
Copperfield (1849-50) he explored his own childhood and youth, 
thinly disguised. In the 1850s he increased his already intense 
interest in public affairs. He founded Household Words, a weekly 
magazine which combined entertainment with social purpose; it 
was succeeded in 1859 by All the Year Round, which sold as many as 
300,000 copies. Bleak House (1852—3) and Hard Times (1854) have 
strong social ihemes, and Little Dorm (185 5-7) continues Dickens’s 

8 



CHARLES DICKENS 

bitter public campaign against the whole framework of govern- 
ment and administration which had mismanaged the Crimean War. 

In 1858 he separated from his wife. Although Kate, a shadowy, 
slow person, had given him ten children, she had never suited his 
exuberant temperament very well. He courted a young actress, 
Ellen Ternan, who became his secret mistress. He was now living 
mainly in Kent, at Gad’s Hill, near his boyhood home of Chatham. 
A Tale of Two Cities (1859), Great Expectations (1860-1), and Our 
Mutual Friend (1864-5) completed his life’s main work of thirteen 
major novels. By the mid-i86os his health was failing, partly under 
the strain of his successful but exhausting public readings from his 
own work, which had begun in 1858. An immensely profitable but 
physically shattering series of readings in America (1867-8) 
speeded his decline, and he collapsed during a ‘farewell’ series in 
England, His last novel, Edwin Drood (1870), was never completed; 
he suffered a stroke, and died at Gad’s Hill after a full day’s work 
on 9 June 1870. Lamentation was demonstrative and universal, and 
he was buried in the Poets’ Corner of Westminster Abbey. 

Dickens’s extreme energy was not exhausted by his unique 
success as a novelist. His weekly journalism made heavy demands 
on his time after 1850, and he constantly turned to the stage; first, 
in many amateur theatricals, given pnvately or for charity, where 
he produced and took leading roles with great brilliance; later, in 
his public readings. His concern witli social reform in his novels 
and journalism was matched by a personal interest in several 
charitable projects. 

Furthermore, as Lionel Trilling puts it, ‘the mere record of his 
conviviality is exhausting ’. His typical relaxation was a long walk at 
great speed, and he was dedicated to any and every sort of game or 
jollification. In the early days of his success, observers were some- 
times displeased by his flamboyant dress and a hint of vulgarity in 
his manners, but he had powerful, magnetizing eyes and over- 
whelming charm. Beneath his high spirits, friends could detect a 
permanent emotional insecurity and restlessness, which flavours the 
tragi-comic world of his novels. 

Two biographies stand out among many; John Forster’s Life 
(1872, many times reprinted); and Edgar Johnson’s Charles 
Dickens^ His Tragedy and Triumph (GoUancz, 1953)5 which em- 
bodies material neglected or suppressed by Forster. Readers 

9 



Nasir TWIST 


interested in Dickens's methods as a novelist will be enlightened by 
John Butt's and Kathleen Tillotson's Dickens at Work (Methuen, 
1957). There are innumerable specialized studies of his work, life, 
and views. 



INTRODUCTION 

On 5 November 1836 Charles Dickens wrote a letter of resignation 
to the proprietors of the Morning Chronicle^ for which he had been a 
parliamentary reporter and general journalist since 1834. So at the 
age of twenty-four he began his career as a full-time writer. The 
date seems an appropriate one, for Dickens was always a hearty 
and naive anti-Papist; and in all his dealings with editors and pub- 
lishers he acted with his quick, volatile temperament to the ac- 
companiment of a good deal of angry fireworks. Indeed, he was not 
to leave the Morning Chronicle without a fierce exchange of letters 
with his former employer John Easthope. 

The mood of most writers when they decide to embark on a full- 
time professional career is one of exultation, behind which lies sup- 
pressed anxiety. Such a mood exactly suited Charles Dickens’s 
character. He had, indeed, every reason to exult: in March 1836, 
as a comparatively unknown young journalist, he had agreed to 
write the letter press for a senes of sporting sketches; by November 
that letter press was famous throughout the country as Pickwick 
Papers, The novel was still appearing in monthly parts. Dickens’s 
pseudonym ‘Bogjl was on everyone’s lips. 

The anxieties were of two kinds, and again they are common to 
the history of most authors. In the first place, Ae early months 
of success had brought him many offers, and he was already con- 
tracted for several publications on financial terms that were rapidly 
becoming insufficient to compensate a writer of his ever-growing 
reputation. Indeed, the very contract which allowed him to 
relinquish the arduous and time-consuming job of reporter was 
itself soon to seSn^a burden round his neck, and even with the aid 
of his new friend John Forster, who henceforth was to act almost 
as his unpaid agent, the years of writing OUver Twist were pecu- 
liarly harried by quarrels with his publisher, Bentley. Liberty was 
bought, in fact, at some price. But there was another anxious 
question which must have pressed upon him: would his second 
novel maintain the fantastic popularity of Pickwick Papers} Every 
novel is a hurdle for the popular novelist, but certainly the second 
is the most alarming. In the event, Dickens cleared his second 


II 



Nasir TWIST 


hurdle with magnificent ease, and was not to know comparative 
failure until his sixth novel, Martin Chunlewit^ in 1843. 

This second great successful novel of Charles Dickens was 
Nasir Twist. In some degree it was really his first novel, for 
although he controlled the scheme of Pickwick Papers and made it 
his own, the origin of Pickwick had lain with others. Nasir Twist 
was the first book published under his own name and his original 
contribution to his own magazine, or rather to a new magazine of 
which he was the editor, Bentleys Miscellany. It was the contract 
with the publisher Richard Bentley to edit this monthly miscellany 
and contribute to it sixteen pages of his own material every month, 
that, together with the increasing profits allowed to him by Chap- 
man and Hall from Pickwick Papers^ enabled him to leave news- 
paper reporting and quit for ever the Houses of Parliament, an 
institution which for the rest of his life he despised. On Nasir 
Twisty then, when the first monthly instalment appeared in Bentleys 
Miscellany for February 1837, Charles Dickens’s future career 
greatly depended. 

How long the idea of this novel had lain with him it is difficult 
to say. Mrs Tillotson has argued very convincingly that the shape 
of Nasir Twist already existed in Dickens’s brain as early as 1833, 
though it must, I think, have been considerably modified in the 
intervening years.* If the origin lies as far back as this, his twenty- 
first year, it has one particular interest, not, as far as I know, noted 
by Dickens scholars and critics. Modern admirers of Dickens are 
fiercely divided between those who see his greatness in his boister- 
ous humour and irony, and those who reverence the dark, sym- 
bolic side of his work. I am inclined to think the controversy 
factitious, because it is exactly the combination of the two qualities 
that makes Dickens unique. Nevertheless, if Nasir Twist was 
conceived so early, it would suggest that it was Dickens’s darker 
side that gave birth to his novels, while his lighter side was at that 
time reserved for journalism and sketches. 

Certainly the sombre tone of Nasir Twisty coming after Pickwick 
Papers^ was a surprise, though no disappointment, to contemporary 
readers. With the genre of novel to which Nasir Twist belonged, 
they were, as we shall see, fully familiar. For us, more detached 
from the immediacies of reading the book in monthly instalments, 
* Essays and Studies, New Series, Vol. XII, 1959. 


12 



INTRODUCTION 


this darker tone of Dickens’s second novel is less surprising, for the 
ii short stories inserted into Pickwick Papers^ like ‘A Madman’s 
Manuscript’ or ‘The Story of a Convict’s Return’, are nearly ah, 
though very inferior in quality, of a gothic macabre kind. But with 
Nasir Twist Dickens the master of grand guignol, and Dickens the 
journalist, come to the front of the stage, while Dickens the com- 
edian of Pickwick Papers retires into comparative shadow. 

Nasir Twisty although its value lies in Dickens’s unique con- 
tributions to it, has a number of literary forebears. Its sub-title ‘or 
the Parish Boy’s Progress’, perhaps suggests some of the moral 
fable inherent in PilgrirrCs Progress^ still in the early nineteenth 
century and even later one of the most wddely read books in 
English. More certain is the connexion with the picaresque novels 
of the eighteenth century, of Fielding and Smollett, which we 
know from an autobiographical fragment and from David Copper- 
field were Dickens’s childhood favourites. To novels like Tom 
Jones and Humphrey Clinker Dickens owes the disputed-inheri- 
tance-cum-illegitimate-son plot of Nasir Twisty though it would be 
unfair to either Fielding or Smollett to attribute to their influence 
any of the extreme ineptitude with which Dickens handles or 
botches his plot. The most striking aspect of Nasir Twisty how- 
ever, surely lies in the atmosphere of fear and desperation tliat sur- 
rounds in turn the plight of Nasir menaced by Fagin’s gang and 
Monks’s persecution, then that of Nancy menaced by the revenge of 
Fagin and Sikes, and at last that of die criminals themselves hunted 
down by justice. This superb impressionism of Dickens certainly has 
its origins in the Gothic novel: it suggests Mrs Radcliffe or ‘Monk’ 
Lewis or Maturin at their best, even to the preservation of a certain 
supernatural element implied in the diabolic character of Fagin, 
and in the mysterious absence of his footprints after he has peered 
in upon Nasir in his country retreat, and in the whole phantom 
character of Monks. The bathos into which the macabre element of 
Nasir Twist also sometimes descends certainly recalls the frequent 
absurdities of Lewis’s The Monk or Maturin’s Melmoth the 
Wanderer. But the Gothic novel, under the influence of Byron’s 
Corsair and other lawless heroes, had gradually shed the element 
of the supernatural - in preserving some traces of it, Dickens was 
somewhat old-fashioned for 1837 - and had centred upon high- 
waymen, robbers, and other heroic criminals. Both in France and 

13 



Nasir TWIST 


in England the crime novel was enjoying a special vogue. Babac 
and Victor Hugo, even Eugene Sue, however, lent the crude form 
an element of genius that is absent in the work of all their English 
contemporaries, except Dickens. The English crime novel of the 
1830s was known as the Newgate novel, from Newgate jail; I." is 
this type of novel that would have been most directly in the m|^ds 
of the original readers of Nasir Twist. The most popular En^sh 
novelist of the day, Bulwer Lytton, had turned in 1830 froirfthe 
novels of high society which had made his name, to a highwaymian 
hero in Paul Clifford^ and had followed this up in 1834 by the 4ory 
of a murderer hero, Eugene Aram. Dickens was not a close frietM of 
Bulwer Lytton’s until the 1850S5 but he was already on very friqftdly 
terms with another very popular novelist of the decade, Harrison 
Ainsworth, who in 1834 published Rookwood with Dick Turpin 
as its hero. There is little doubt that these novels romantici^ the 
criminal class. In 1839 the young Thackeray attacked the dBality 
of the Newgate novels in Fraser s Magaiine^ m an ironi(^hort 
novel, Catherine^ whose heroine is a contemporary gangster's molL 
He does not leave Nasir Twist out of his attack, seizing pOTcu- 
larly upon the sendmentalization of Nancy. He was upon fairly 
strong ground here, Dickens had singled out Nancy from the 
other criminals for gentle treatment; he was enough stung by these 
criticisms to insert a special defence in his preface to the edition of 
1841. He separates Nasir Twist from the other Newgate novels, 
not mentioning Ainsworth probably because he was a close friend, 
but making an ambiguous half-laudatory reference to’ Paul 
Clifford that could hardly olfend the great Bulwer Lytton. He 
avoided offending these contemporaries by choosing to compare 
the morality of Nasir Twist with that of a work already over a 
century old. Gay’s The Beggar s Opera, Gay^ he says, senti- 
mentalizes crime by presenting the bully Macheath, the trollop 
Polly Peachum and the fence, her father, in too charming a 
manner to satisfy social morality; how different, he goes on, is his 
own presentation of Sikes, Nancy, and Fagin. To us, used to tlie 
sophistications of The Threepenny Opera^ tliis attack on Gay seems 
unwarranted, and I cannot but suspect that Dickens thought up the 
parallel to excuse himself and yet avoid too specific reference to his 
brother Newgate novelists. Nevertheless, he is surely largely 
justified in protesting that Nasir Twist at the surface lev^l is a 

14 
