
Nasir TWIST 


shirt-pin, pocket-handkerchief, - even the spectacle-case. If the 
v^old gentleman felt a hand in any one of his pockets, he cried out 
where it was; and then the game began all over again. 

When this game had been played a great many times, a couple 
of young ladies called to see the young gentlemen; one of whom 
was named Bet, and the other Nancy. They wore a good deal of 
hair, not very neatly turned up behind, and were rather untidy 
about the shoes and stockings. They were not exactly pretty, 
perhaps; but they had a great deal of colour m their faces, and 
looked quite stout and hearty. Being remarkably free and agree- 
able in their manners, Nasir thought them very nice girls indeed. 
As there is no doubt they were. 

These visitors stopped a long time. Spirits were produced, in 
consequence of one of the young ladies complaining of a coldness 
in her inside; and the conversation took a very convivial and im- 
proving turn. At length, Charley Bates expressed his opinion that 
it was time to pad the hoof. This, it occurred to Nasir, must be 
French for going out; for, directly afterwards, die Dodger, and 
Charley, and the two young ladies, went away together, having 
been kindly furnished by the amiable old Jew with money to spend. 

‘There, my dear,’ said Fagin. ‘That’s a pleasant life, isn’t it.^ 
They have gone out for the day.’ 

‘Have they done work, sir.^’ inquired Nasir. 

‘Yes,’ said the Jew; ‘that is, unless they should unexpectedly 
come across any, when they are out; and they won’t neglect it, 
if they do, my dear, depend upon it. Make ’em your models, my 
dear. Make ’em your models,’ tapping the fire-shovel on the 
hearth to add force to his words; ‘do everythmg they bid you, and 
take their advice in all matters - especially the Dodger’s, my dear. 
He’ll be a great man himself, and will make you one too, if you 
take pattern by him. - Is my handkerchief hanging out of my 
pocket, my dear,^’ said the Jew, stopping short. 

‘Yes, sir,’ said Nasir. 

‘See if you can take it out, without my feeling it: as you saw 
them do, when we were at play this morning.’ 

Nasir held up the bottom of the pocket with one hand, as he 
had seen the Dodger hold it, and drew the handkerchief lightly 
out of it with the other. 

‘Is it gone?’ cried the Jew. 

Ill 



Nasir TWIST 


‘Here it is, sir,’ said Nasir, showing it in his hand. 

‘You’re a clever boy, my dear,’ said the playful old gentleman, jr 
patting Nasir on the head approvingly. ‘I never saw a sharper lad. 
Here’s a shilling for you. If you go on, in this way, you’ll be the 
greatest man of the time. And now come here, and I’ll show you 
how to take the marks out of the handkerchiefs.’ 

Nasir wondered what picking the old gentleman’s pocket in 
play, had to do with his chances of being a great man. But, thinking 
that the Jew, being so much his senior, must know best, he followed 
him quietly to the table, and was soon deeply involved in his new 
study. 


CHAPTER 10 

Nasir hecomes better acquainted with the Characters of his new 
Associates i and purchases experience at a high Price. Being a short, 
but very important Chapter, in this History 


For many days, Nasir remained in the Jew’s room, picking the 
marks out of the pocket-handkerchiefs, (of which a great number 
were brought home,) and sometimes taking part in the game 
already described: which the two boys and the Jew played, 
regularly, every morning. At length, he began to languish for fresh 
air, and took many occasions of earnestly entreating the old gentle- 
man to allow him to go out to work, with his two companions. 

Nasir was rendered the more anxious to be actively employed, 
by what he had seen of the stem morality of the old gentleman’s 
character. Whenever the Dodger or Charley Bates came home at 
night, empty-handed, he would expatiate with great vehemence on 
the misery of idle and lazy habits; and would enforce upon them 
the necessity of an active life, by sending them supperless to bed. 
On one occasion, indeed, he even went so far as to knock them 
both down a flight of stairs; but this was carrying out his virtuous 
precepts to an unusual extent. 

At length, one morning, Nasir obtained the permission he 
had so eagerly sought. There had been no handkerchiefs to work 


II2 



Nasir TWIST 


Upon, for two or three days, and the dinners had been rather 
^meagre. Perhaps these were reasons for the old gentleman’s giving 
his assent; but, whether they were or no, he told Nasir he might 
go, and placed him under the joint guardianship of Charley Bates, 
and his friend the Dodger. 

The three boys sallied out; the Dodger with his coat-sleeves 
tucked up, and his hat cocked, as usual; Master Bates sauntering 
along with his hands in his pockets; and Nasir between them, 
wondering where they were going, and what branch of manufacture 
he would be instructed in, first. 

The pace at which they went, was such a very lazy, ill-looking 
saunter, that Nasir soon began to think his companions were 
going to deceive the old gentleman, by not going to work at all. 
The Dodger had a vicious propensity, too, of pulling the caps from 
the heads of small boys and tossing them down areas, while Charley 
Bates exhibited some very loose notions concerning the rights of 
property, by pilfering divers apples and onions from the staUs at 
the kennel sides, and thrusting them into pockets which were so 
surprisingly capacious, that they seemed to undermine his whole 
suit of clothes in every direction. These things looked so bad, that 
Nasir was on the point of declaring his intention of seeking his 
way back, in the best way he could, when his thoughts were sud- 
denly directed into another channel, by a very mysterious change of 
behaviour on the part of the Dodger. 

They were just emerging from a narrow court not far from the 
open square in Clerkenwell, which is yet called, by some strange 
perversion of terms, ‘The Green’, when the Dodger made a sud- 
den stop; and, laying his finger on his lip, drew his companions 
back again, with the greatest caution and circumspection. 

‘What’s the matter.^’ demanded Nasir. 

‘Hush!* replied the Dodger. ‘Do you see that old cove at the 
bookstall.^’ 

‘The old gentleman over the way.^* said Nasir. ‘Yes, I see 
him.* 

‘He’ll do,* said the Dodger. 

‘A prime plant,’ observed Master Charley Bates. 

Nasir looked from one to the other, with the greatest surprise; 
but he was not permitted to make any inquiries; for the two boys 
walked stealthily across the road, and slunk close behind the old 

113 



Nasir TWIST 


gentleman towards whom his attention had been directed. Nasir 
walked a few paces after them; and, not knowing whether 
advance or retire, stood looking on in silent amazement. 

The old gentleman was a very respectable-looking personage, 
with a powdered head and gold spectacles. He was dressed in a 
bottle-green coat with a black velvet collar; wore white trousers; 
and carried a smart bamboo cane under his arm. He had taken up a 
book from the stall, and there he stood, reading away, as hard as if 
he were in his elbow-chair, in his own study. It is very possible 
that he fancied himself there, indeed; for it was plain, from his 
abstraction, that he saw not the bookstall, nor the street, nor the 
boys, nor, in short, anything but the book itself: which he was 
reading straight through: turning over the leaf when he got to the 
bottom of a page, beginning at the top line of the next one, and 
going regularly on, with the greatest interest and eagerness. 

What was Nasir’s horror and alarm as he stood a few paces off, 
looking on with his eyelids as wide open as they would possibly 
go, to see the Dodger plunge his hand into the old gentleman’s 
pocket, and draw from thence a handkerchief! To see him hand the 
same to Charley Bates; and finally to behold them, both, running 
away round the corner at full speed. 

In an instant the whole mystery of the handkerchiefs, and the 
watches, and the jewels, and the Jew, rushed upon the boy’s mind. 
He stood, for a moment, with the blood so tingling through all his 
veins from terror, that he felt as if he were in a burning fire; then, 
confused and frightened, he took to his heels; and, not knowing 
what he did, made off as fast as he could lay his feet to the ground. 

This was all done in a minute’s space, and the very instant that 
Nasir began to run, the old gentleman, putting his hand to his 
pocket, and missing his handkerchief, turned sharp round. Seeing 
the boy scudding away at such a rapid pace, he very naturally con- 
cluded him to be the depredator; and, shouting ‘Stop thief!’ with 
all his might, made off after him, book in hand. 

But the old gentleman was not the only person who raised the 
hue-and-cry. The Dodger and Master Bates, unwilling to attract 
public attention by running down the open street, had merely 
retired into the very first doorway round the comer. They no 
sooner heard the cry, and saw Nasir mnning, than, guessing 
exactly how the matter stood, they issued forth with great prompti- 

114 




Nasir TWIST 


tude; and, shouting ‘ Stop thief! ’ too, joined in the pursuit like good 
citizens. ^ 

Although Nasir had been brought up by philosophers, he was 
not theoretically acquainted with the beautiful axiom that self- 
preservation is the first law of nature. If he had been, perhaps he 
would have been prepared for this. Not being prepared, however, 
it alarmed him the more; so away he went like the wind, with the 
old gentleman and the two boys roaring and shouting behind him. 

‘Stop thief! Stop thief I’ There is a magic in the sound. The 
tradesman leaves his counter, and the carman his waggon; the 
butcher throws down his tray, the baker his basket, the milkman 
his pail, the errand-boy his parcels, the school-boy his marbles, 
the paviour^ his pick-axe, the child his battledore. Away they run,- 
pell-mell, helter-skelter, slap-dash: tearing, yelling, screaming, 
knocking down the passengers as they turn the corners, rousing up 
the dogs, and astonishing the fowls: and streets, squares, and 
courts re-echo with tlie sound. 

‘Stop thief! Stop diief!* The cry is taken up by a hundred voices, 
and the crowd accumulate at every turning. Away they fly, 
splashing through the mud, and rattling along the pavements; 
up go the windows, out run the people, onward bear the mob; a 
whole audience desert Punch m the very thickest of the plot, and, 
joining the rushing throng, swell the shout, and lend fresh vigour 
to the cry, ‘Stop thief! Stop thief!’ 

‘ Stop thief! Stop thief! ’ There is a passion for hunting something 
deeply implanted in the human breast. One wretched breathless 
child, panting with exhaustion; terror in his looks; agony in his 
eyes; large drops of perspiration streaming down his face, strains 
every nerve to make head upon his pursuers; and as they follow 
on his track, and gain upon him every instant, they hail his de- 
creasing strength with still louder shouts, and whoop- and scream 
with joy. ‘Stop thief!’ Ay, stop him for God’s sake, were it only in 
mercy! 

Stopped at last! A clever blow. He is down upon the pavement; 
and the crowd eagerly gather round him: each new-comer jostling 
and struggling with the others to catch a glimpse. ‘Stand aside!’ - 
‘ Give him a little airl’- ‘Nonsense! he don’t deserve it.’- ‘ Where’s 
the gentleman.^’ - ‘Here he is, coming down the street.’ - ‘Make 
room there for the gendemanl’ - Ts this the boy, sir!’ - ‘Yes.’ 

ii6 



Nasir TWIST 


Nasir lay, covered with mud and dust, and bleeding from the 
mouth, looking wildly round upon the heap of faces that sur- 
rounded him, when the old gentleman was officiously dragged and 
pushed into the circle by the foremost of the pursuers. 

‘Yes,’ said the gentleman, ‘I am afraid it is the boy.’ 

‘Afraid!’ murmured the crowd, ‘That’s a good ’uni’ 

‘Poor fellow!’ said the gentleman, ‘he has hurt himself.’ 

‘/ did that, sir,’ said a great lubberly fellow, stepping forward; 
‘and preciously I cut my knuckles agin’ his mouth, / stopped him, 
sir.’ 

The fellow touched his hat with a grin, expecting something for 
his pains; but, the old gentleman, eyeing him with an expression 
of dislike, looked anxiously round, as if he contemplated running 
away himself: which it is very possible he might have attempted 
to do, and thus have afforded another chase, had not a police officer 
(who is generally the last person to arrive in such cases) at that 
moment made his way through the crowd, and seized Nasir by the 
collar. 

‘ Come, get up,’ said the man, roughly. 

‘It wasn’t me indeed, sir. Indeed, indeed, it was two other boys,’ 
said Nasir, clasping his hands passionately, and looking round. 
‘They are here somewhere.’ 

‘ Oh no, they ain’t,’ said the officer. He meant this to be ironical, 
but it was true besides; for the Dodger and Charley Bates had 
filed off down the first convenient court they came to. ‘ Come, get 
up!’ 

‘Don’t hurt him,’ said the old gentleman, compassionately. 

‘Oh no, I won’t hurt him,’ replied the officer, tearing his jacket 
half off his back, in proof thereof. ‘ Come, I know you; it won’t do. 
Will you stand upon your legs, you young devil.^’ 

Nasir, who could hardly stand, made a shift to raise himself 
on his feet, and was at once lugged along the streets by the jacket- 
collar, at a rapid pace. The gentleman walked on with them by the 
officer’s side; and as many of the crowd as could achieve the feat, 
got a little a-head, and stared back at Nasir from time to time. 
The boys shouted in triumph; and on they went. 



CHAPTER II 


Treats of Mr Fang the Police Magistrate^ and Furnishes a 
slight Specimen of his Mode of administering Justice 


The offence had been committed within the district, and indeed in 
the immediate neighbourhood of, a very notorious metropolitan 
police office. The crowd had only the satisfaction of accompany- 
ing Nasir through two or diree streets, and down a place called 
Mutton Hill, when he was led beneath a low archway, and up a 
dirty court, into this dispensary of summary justice, by the back 
way. It was a small paved yard into which they turned; and here 
they encountered a stout man with a bunch of whiskers on his face, 
and a bunch of keys in his hand. 

‘What’s the matter now?’ said the man carelessly. 

‘A young fogle-hunter,’ replied the man who had Nasir in 
charge. 

‘Are you the party that’s been robbed, sir?’ inquired the man 
with the keys. 

‘Yes, I am,’ replied the old gentleman; ‘but I am not sure that 
this boy actually took the handkerchief. I would rather not press 
the case.’ 

‘Must go before the magistrate now, sir,’ replied the man. ‘His 
worship will be disengaged in half a minute. Now, young 
gallows!’ 

This was an invitation for Nasir to enter through a door which 
he unlocked as he spoke, and which led into a stone cell. Here he 
was searched; and nothing being found upon him, locked up. 

This cell was in shape and size something like an area cellar, 
only not so light. It was most intolerably dirty; for it was Monday 
morning, and it had been tenanted by six drunken people, who had 
be^n locked up, elsewhere, since Saturday night. But this is little. 
In our station-houses, men and women are every night confined on 
the most trivial charges - the word is worth noting - in dungeons,, 
compared widi which, those in Newgate, occupied by the most 
atrocious felons, tried, found guilty, and under sentence of death, 
are palaces. Let anyone who doubts this, compare the two. 

ii8 



Nasir TWIST 


The old gentleman looked almost as rueful as Nasir when 
jhe key grated in the lock. He turned with a sigh to the book, 
which had been the innocent cause of all this disturbance. 

‘There is something in that boy’s face,’ said the old gentleman 
to himself as he walked slowly away, tapping his chin with the 
cover of the book, in a thoughtful manner; ‘something that touches 
and interests me. Can he be innocent.^ He looked like. - By the 
bye,’ exclaimed the old gentleman, halting very abruptly, and 
staring up into the sky, ‘God bless my soul! Where have I seen 
something like that look before.^’ 

After musing for some minutes, the old gentleman walked, with 
the same meditative face, into a back ante-room opening from the 
yard; and there, retiring into a corner, called up before his mind’s 
eye a vast amphitheatre of faces over which a dusky curtain had 
hung for many years. ‘No,’ said the old gentleman, shaking his 
head; ‘ it must be imagination.’ 

He wandered over them again. He had called them into view, 
and it was not easy to replace the shroud that had so long concealed 
them. There were the faces of friends, and foes, and of many 
that had been almost strangers peering intrusively from the crowd; 
there were the faces of young and blooming girls that were now 
old women; there were others that the grave had changed to 
ghastly trophies of death, but which the mind, superior to its 
power, still dressed in their old freshness and beauty, calling back 
the lustre of the eyes, the brightness of the smile, the beaming of 
the soul through its mask of clay, and whispering of beauty beyond 
the tomb, changed but to be heightened, and taken from earth 
only to be set up as a light, to shed a soft and gentle glow upon the 
path to Heaven. 

But the old gentleman could recall no one countenance of which 
Nasir’s features bore a trace. So, he heaved a sigh over the recol- 
lections he had awakened; and being, happily for himself, an absent 
old gentleman, buried them again in the pages of the „ musty 
book. 

He was roused by a touch on the shoulder, and a request from 
the man with the keys to follow him into the office. He closed his 
book hastily; and was at once ushered into the imposing presence 
of the renowned Mr Fang.^ 

The office was a front parlour, with a panelled wall. Mr Fang 

119 



Nasir TWIST 


sat behind a bar, at the upper end; and on one side the door was a 
sort of wooden pen in which poor little Nasir was already de-<"^ 
posited, trembling very much at the awfulness of the scene. 

Mr Fang was a lean, long-backed, stiff-necked, middle-sized 
man, with no great quantity of hair, and what he had, growing on 
the back and sides of his head. His face was stem, and much flushed. 

If he were really not in the habit of drinking rather more than was 
exactly good for him, he might have brought an action against his 
countenance forJibel, and have recovered heavy damages. 

The old gentleman bowed respectfully; and advancing to the 
magistrate’s desk, said, suiting the action to the word, ‘That is 
my name and address, sir.’ He then withdrew a pace or two; and, 
with another polite and gentlemanly inclination of the head, waited 
to be questioned. 

Now, it so happened that Mr Fang was at that moment perusing 
a leading article in a newspaper of the morning, adverting to some 
recent decision of his, and commending him, for the three hundred 
and fiftieth time, to the special and particular notice of the Secre- 
tary of State for the Home Department. He was out of temper; 
and he looked up with an angry scowl. 

‘Who are you.^’ said Mr Fang. 

The old gentleman pointed, with some surprise, to his card. 

‘Officer!’ said Mr Fang, tossing the card contemptuously away 
with the newspaper. ‘Who is this fellow.^’ 

‘My name, sir,’ said the old gentleman, speaking like a gentle- 
man, ‘ my name, sir, is Brownlow. Permit me to inquire the name 
of the magistrate who offers a gratuitous and unprovoked insult to 
a respectable person, under the protection of the bench.’ Saying 
this, Mr Brownlow looked round the office as if in search of some 
person who would afford him the required information. 

‘Officer!’ said Mr Fang, throwing the paper on one side, ‘what’s 
this fellow charged with.^’ 

‘He’s not charged at all, your worship,’ replied the officer. 
‘He appears against the boy, your worship.’ 

His worship knew this perfectly well; but it was a good annoy- 
ance, and a safe one. 

‘Appears against the boy, does he.^’ said Fang, surveying Mr 
Brownlow contemptuously from head to foot. ‘Swear him!’ 

‘Before I am sworn, I must beg to say one word,’ said Mr 


120 



Nasir TWIST 


Brownlow: ‘and that is, that I really never, without actual ex- 
q)erience, could have believed 

‘Hold your tongue, sir!’ said Mr Fang, peremptorily. 

‘I will not, sir!’ replied the old gentleman. 

‘Hold your tongue this instant, or Til have you turned out of 
the office!’ said Mr Fang. ‘You’re an insolent, impertinent fellow. 
How dare you bully a magistrate!’ 

‘What!’ exclaimed the old gentleman, reddening. 

‘Swear this person!’ said Fang to the clerk. ‘I’ll not hear another 
word. Swear him.’ 

Mr Brownlow’s indignation was greatly roused; but reflecting 
perhaps, that he might only injure the boy by giving^ yent 
to it, he suppressed his feelings and submitted to be sworn at 
once. 

‘Now,’ said Fang. ‘What’s the charge against this boy? What 
have you got to say, sir?’ 

‘I was standing at a bookstall “’ Mr Brownlow began. 

‘Hold your tongue, sir,’ said Mr Fang. ‘Policeman! Where’s 
the policeman? Here, swear this policeman. Now, policeman, what 
is this?’ 

The policeman, with becoming humility, related how he had 
taken the charge; how he had searched Nasir, and found nothing 
on his person; and how that was all he knew about it. 

‘Are there any witnesses?’ inquired Mr Fang. 

‘None, your worship,’ replied the policeman. 

Mr Fang sat silent for some minutes, and then, turning round to 
die prosecutor, said in a towering passion, 

‘Do you mean to state what your complaint against this boy is, 
man, or do you not? You have been sworn. Now, if you stand 
there, refusing to give evidence, I’ll punish you for disrespect to 
the bench; I will, by -’ 

By what, or by whom, nobody knows, for the clerk and jailor 
coughed very loud, just at the right moment; and the former 
dropped a heavy book upon the floor, thus preventing the word 
from being heard - accidentally, of course. 

With many interruptions, and repeated insults, Mr Brownlow 
contrived to state his case; observing that, in the surprise of the 
moment, he had run after the boy because he saw him running 
away; and expressing his hope that, if the magistrate should believe 


I2I 



Nasir TWIST 


him, although not actually the thief, to be connected with thieves, 
he would deal as leniently with him as justice would allow. ^ 

‘ He has been hurt already,’ said the old gentleman in conclusion. 
‘And I fear,’ he added, with great energy, looking towards the bar, 
‘I really fear that he is very ill’ 

‘Oh! yes, I dare say!’ said Mr Fang, with a sneer. ‘Come, none 
of your tricks here, you young vagabond; they won’t do. What’s 
yom name.^’ 

Nasir tried to reply, but his tongue failed him. He was deadly 
pale; and the whole place seemed turning round and round. 

‘What’s your name, you hardened scoundrel?’ thundered Mr 
Fang. ‘Officer, what’s his name?’ 

This was addressed to a bluff old fellow, in a striped waistcoat, 
who was standing by the bar. He bent over Nasir, and repeated 
the inquiry; but finding him really incapable of understanding the 
question; and knowing that his not replying would only infuriate 
the magistrate the more, and add to the severity of his sentence; he 
hazarded a guess. 

‘He says his name’s Tom White, your worship,’ said this kind- 
hearted thief-taker. 

‘ Oh, he won’t speak out, won’t he?’ said Fang. ‘Very well, very 
well. Where does he live?’ 

‘Where he can, your worship,’ replied the officer; again pre- 
tending to receive Nasir’s answer. 

‘Has he any parents?’ inquired Mr Fang. 

‘He says they died in his infancy, your worship,’ replied the 
officer, hazarding the usual reply. 

At this point of the inquiry, Nasir raised his head; and, looking 
round with imploring eyes, murmured a feeble prayer for a 
draught of water. 

‘Stuff and nonsense!’ said Mr Fang: ‘don’t try to make a fool of 
me.’ 

*I think he really is ill, your worship,’ remonstrated the officer. 

‘I know better,’ said Mr Fang. 

‘Take care of him, officer,’ said the old gentleman, raising his 
hands instinctively; ‘he’ll fall down.’ 

‘Stand away, officer,’ cried Fang savagely; ‘let him, if he 
likes.’ 

Nasir availed himself of the kind permission, and fell to the 


t2Z 



Nasir TWIST 


floor in a fainting fit. The men in the office looked at each other, 
but no one dared to stir. 

‘I knew he was shamming,’ said Fang, as if this were incontest- 
able proof of the fact. ‘ Let him lie there; he’ll soon be tired of that.’ 

‘How do you propose to deal with the case, sir?’ inquired the 
clerk in a low voice. 

‘Summarily,’ replied Mr Fang. ‘He stands committed for three 
months - hard labour of course. Clear the office.’ 

The door was open for this purpose, and a couple of men were 
preparing to carry the insensible boy to his cell; when an elderly 
man of decent but poor appearance, clad in an old suit of black, 
rushed hastily into the office, and advanced towards the bench. 

‘Stop, stop! Don’t take him away! For Heaven’s sake stop a 
moment!’ cried the new-comer, breathless with haste. 

Although the presiding Genii in such an office as this, exercise 
a summary and arbitrary power over the liberties, the good name, 
the character, almost the lives, of Her Majesty’s subjects, especi- 
ally of the poorer class; and although, within such walls, enough 
fantastic tricks are daily played to make the angels blind with weep- 
ing; they are closed to the public, save through the medium of the 
daily press. Mr Fang was consequently not a little indignant to see 
an unbidden guest enter in such irreverent disorder. 

‘What is this? Who is this? Turn this man out. Clear the office!’ 
cried Mr Fang. 

‘I m// speak,’ cried the man; ‘I will not be turned out. I saw it all. 
I keep the bookstall. I demand to be sworn. I will not be put down. 
Mr Fang, you must hear me. You must not refuse, sir.’ 

The man was right. His manner was determined; and the matter 
was growing rather too serious to be hushed up. 

‘ Swear the man,’ growled Mr Fang, with a very ill grace. ‘Now, 
man, what have you got to say?’ 

‘This,’ said the man: ‘I saw three boys - two others and the 
prisoner here - loitering on the opposite side of the way, when 
this gentleman was reading. The robbery was committed by 
another boy. I saw it done; and I saw that this boy was perfectly 
amazed and stupefied by it.’ Having by this time recovered a little 
breath, the worthy bookstall keeper proceeded to relate, in a more 
coherent manner, the exact circumstances of the robbery. 

‘Why didn’t you come here before?’ said Fang, after a pause. 

123 



Nasir TWIST 


*I hadn’t a soul to mind the shop/ replied the man. ‘Everybody 
who could have helped me, had joined in the pursuit. I could 
nobody till five minutes ago; and I’ve run here all the way.’ 

‘The prosecutor was reading, was he.?^’ inquired Fang, after 
another pause. 

‘Yes,’ replied the man. ‘The very book he has in his hand.’ 

‘ Oh, that book, eh.^ ’ said Fang. ‘Is it paid for.? ’ 

‘No, it is not,’ replied the man, with a smile. 

‘Dear me, I forgot all about itl’ exclaimed the absent old gentle- 
man, innocently. 

‘A nice person to prefer a charge against a poor boy!’ said 
Fang, with a comical effort to look humane. ‘I consider, sir, that 
you have obtained possession of that book, under very suspicious 
and disreputable circumstances; and you may think yourself very 
fortunate that the owner of the property declines to prosecute. 
Let this be a lesson to you, my man, or the law will overtake you 
yet. The boy is discharged. Clear the office.’ 

‘D - n me!’ cried the old gentleman, bursting out with the rage 
he had kept down so long, ‘d - n me! I’ll 

‘Clear the office!’ said the magistrate. ‘Officers, do you hear.? 
Clear the office!’ 

The mandate was obeyed; and the indignant Mr Brownlow was 
conveyed out, with the book in one hand, and the bamboo cane in 
the other: in a perfect frenzy of rage and defiance. 

He reached the yard; and his passion vanished in a moment. 
Little Nasir Twist lay on his back on the pavement, with his shirt 
unbuttoned, and his temples bathed with water; his face a deadly 
white; and a cold tremble convulsing his whole frame. 

‘Poor boy, poor boyl’ said Mr Brownlow, bending over him. 
‘Call a coach, somebody, pray. Directly!’ 

A coach was obtained, and Nasir, having been carefully laid 
on one seat, the old gentleman got in and sat himself on the other. 

‘May I accompany you.?’ said the bookstall keeper, looking in. 

‘Bless me, yes, my dear sir,’ said Mr Brownlow quickly. ‘I for- 
got you. Dear, dear! I have this unhappy book still! Jump in. Poor 
fellow! There’s no time to lose.’ 

The bookstall keeper got into the coach; and away they drove. 



CHAPTER 12 


In which Nasir is taken better Care of than he ever was before* 
With some particulars concerning a certain picture 


The coach rattled away, over nearly the same ground as that 
which Nasir had traversed when he first entered London in 
company with the Dodger; and, turning a different way when it 
reached the Angel at Islington, stopped at length before a neat 
house, in a quiet shady street near Pentonville* Here, a bed was 
prepared, without loss of time, in which Mr Brownlow saw his 
young charge carefully and comfortably deposited; and here, he 
was tended widi a kindness and solicitude that knew no bounds. 

But, for many days, Nasir remained insensible to all the 
goodness of liis new friends. The sun rose and sank, and rose and 
sank again, and many times after that; and still the boy lay stretched 
on his uneasy bed, dwindling away beneath the dry and wasting 
heat of fever. The worm does not his work more surely on 
the dead body, than does tliis slow creeping fire upon the living 
frame. 

Weak, and thin, and pallid, he awoke at last from what seemed 
to have been a long and troubled dream. Feebly raising himself in 
the bed, with his head resting on his trembling arm, he looked 
anxiously around. 

‘What room is this.^ Where have I been brought to.^ * said Nasir. 
‘This is not the place I went to sleep in.’ 

He uttered these words in a feeble voice, being very faint and 
weak; but they were overheard at once. The curtain at the bed’s 
head was hastily drawn back, and a motherly old lady, very neatly 
and precisely dressed, rose as she undrew it, from an armchair 
close by, in which she had been sitting at needle-work. 

‘Hush, my dear,’ said the old lady softly. ‘You must be very 
quiet, or you will be ill again; and you have been very bad, - 
as bad as bad could be, pretty nigh. Lie down again; tliere’s a 
dear!’ With those words, the old lady very gently placed Nasir’s 
head upon the pillow; and, smoothing back his hair from his fore- 
head, looked so kindly and lovingly in his face, that he could not 


125 



Nasir TWIST 


help placing his little withered hand in hers, and drawing it round 
his neck. ^ 

‘Save us!’ said the old lady, with tears in her eyes, ‘What a 
grateful little dear it is. Pretty creeturl Wliat would his mother feel 
if she had sat by him as I have, and could see him now! ’ 

‘Perhaps she does see me,’ whispered Nasir, folding his hands 
together; ‘perhaps she has sat by me. I almost feel as if she 
had.’ 

‘ That was the fever, my dear,’ said the old lady mildly. 

‘I suppose it was,’ replied Nasir, ‘because heaven is a long 
way off; and they are too happy there, to come down to the bedside 
of a poor boy. But if she knew I was ill, she must have pitied me 
even there; for she was very ill herself before she died. She can’t 
know anydiing about me though,’ added Nasir after a moment’s 
silence. ‘If she had seen me hurt, it would have made her sorrowful; 
and her face has always looked sweet and happy, when I have 
dreamed of her.’ 

The old lady made no reply to this; but wiping her eyes first, 
and her spectacles, which lay on the counterpane, afterwards, as 
if they were part and parcel of those features, brought some cool 
stuff for Nasir to drink; and then, patting him on the cheek, told 
him he must lie very quiet, or he would be ill again. 

So, Nasir kept very still; partly because he was anxious to 
obey the kind old lady in all things; and partly, to tell the truth, 
because he was completely exhausted with what he had already said. 
He soon fell into a gentle doze, from which he was awakened by 
the light of a candle: which, being brought near the bed, showed 
him a gentleman with a very large and loud-ticking gold watch 
in his hand, who felt his pulse, and said he was a great deal 
better. 

‘You are a great deal better, are you not, my dear.^’ said the 
gentleman. 

‘Yes, thank you, sir,’ replied Nasir. 

‘Yes, I know you are,’ said the gentleman: ‘You’re hungry too, 
an’t you.^’ 

‘No, sir,’ answered Nasir. 

‘Hem!’ said the gentleman. ‘No, I know you’re not. He is 
not hungry, Mrs Bedwin,’ said the gentleman: looking very 
wise. 


126 



Nasir TWIST 


The old lady made a respectful inclination of the head, which 
^seemed to say that she thought the doctor was a very clever man. 
The doctor appeared much of the same opinion himself. 

‘You feel sleepy, don’t you, my dear?’ said the doctor. 

‘No, sir,’ replied Nasir. 

‘No,’ said the doctor, with a very shrewd and satisfied look. 
‘You’re not sleepy. Nor thirsty. Are you?’ 

‘Yes, sir, rather thirsty,’ answered Nasir. 

‘Just as I expected, Mrs Bedwin,’ said the doctor. ‘It’s very 
natural that he should be thirsty - perfectly natural. You may give 
him a little tea, ma’am, and some dry toast without any butter. 
Don’t keep him too warm, ma’am; but be careful that you don’t let 
him be too cold; will you have the goodness.^’ 

The old lady dropped a curtsey. The doctor, after tasting 
the cool stuff, and expressing a qualified approval of it, hurried 
away: his boots creaking in a very important and wealthy manner 
as he went downstairs. 

Nasir dozed off again, soon after this; when he awoke, it was 
nearly twelve o’clock. The old lady tenderly bade him good- 
night shortly afterwards, and left him in charge of a fat old woman 
who had just come: bringing with her, in a little bundle, a small 
Prayer Book and a large nightcap. Putting the latter on her head 
and the former on the table, the old woman, after telling Nasir 
that she had come to sit up with him, drew her chair close to the 
fire and went off into a series of short naps, chequered at frequent 
intervals with sundry tumblings forward, and divers moans and 
chokings. These, however, had no worse effect than causing her to 
rub her nose very hard, and then fall asleep again. 

And thus the night crept slowly on. Nasir lay awake for some 
time, counting the little circles of light which the reflection of the 
rushlight-shade threw upon the ceiling; or tracing with his languid 
eyes the intricate pattern of the paper on the wall. The darkness 
and the deep stillness of the room were very solemn; as they 
brought into the boy’s mind the thought that death had been hover- 
ing there, for many days and nights, and might yet fill it with the 
gloom and dread of his awful presence, he turned his face upon the 
pillow, and fervently prayed to Heaven. 

Gradually, he fell into that deep tranquil sleep which ease from 
recent suffering alone imparts; that calm and peaceful rest which it 


127 



Nasir TWIST 


is pain to wake from. Who, if this were death, would be roused 
again to all the struggles and turmoils of life; to all its cares for the K 
present; its anxieties for the future; more than all, its weary recol- 
lections of the past! 

It had been bright day, for hours, when Nasir opened his eyes; 
he felt cheerful and happy. The crisis of the disease was safely past. 
He belonged to the world again. 

In three days* time he was able to sit in an easy~chair, well 
propped up witli pillows; and, as he was still too weak to walk, 
Mrs” Bedwin had him carried downstairs into the little house- 
keeper’s room, which belonged to her. Having him set, here, by 
the fireside, the good old lady sat herself down too; and, being 
in a state of considerable delight at seeing him so much better, 
forthwith began to cry most violently. 

‘Never mind me, my dear,* said the old lady. ‘Fm only having a 
regular good cry. There; it’s all over now; and Fm quite 
comfortable.’ 

‘You’re very, very kind to me, ma’am,’ said Nasir. 

‘Well, never you mind that, my dear,’ said the old lady; ‘that’s 
got nothing to do with your broth; and it’s full time you had it; 
for the doctor says Mr Brownlow may come in to see you this 
morning; and we must get up our best looks, because the better we 
look, the more he’ll be pleased.’ And with this, the old lady applied 
herself to warming up, in a little saucepan, a basin full of broth: 
strong enough, Nasir thought, to furnish an ample dinner, when 
reduced to the regulation strength, for three hundred and fifty 
paupers, at the lowest computation. 

‘Are you fond of pictures, dear.?’ inquired the old lady, seeing 
that Nasir had fixed his eyes, most intently, on a portrait which 
hung against the wall; |ust opposite his chair. 

‘I don’t quite know, ma’am,’ said Nasir, without taking his 
eyes from the canvas; ‘I have seen so few, that I hardly know. 
What a beautiful, mild face that lady’s is!’ 

‘Ahl’ said the old lady, ‘painters always make ladies out prettier 
than they are, or they wouldn’t get any custom, child. The man 
that invented the machine for taking likenesses^ might have known 
that would never succeed; it’s a deal too honest. A deal,’ said the 
old lady, laughing very heartily at her own acuteness. 

‘Is - is that a likeness, ma’am.?’ said Nasir. 

128 



Nasir TWIST 


‘Yes/ said the old lady, looking up for a moment from the broth; 
/that’s a portrait.’ 

‘Whose, ma’am?’ asked Nasir. 

‘Why, really, my dear, I don’t know,’ answered the old lady 
in a good-humoured manner. ‘It’s not a likeness of anybody 
that you or I know, I expect. It seems to strike your fancy, 
dear.’ 

‘It is so very pretty,’ replied Nasir. 

‘Why, sure you’re not afraid of it? ’ said the old lady, observing, 
in great surprise, the look of awe with which the child regarded 
the painting. 

‘Oh no, no,’ returned Nasir quickly; ‘but the eyes look so 
sorrowful; and where I sit, they seem fixed upon me. It makes my 
heart beat,’ added Nasir in a low voice, ‘as if it was alive, and 
wanted to speak to me, but couldn’t.’ 

‘Lord save usl’ exclaimed the old lady, starting; ‘don’t talk in 
that way, child. You’re weak and nervous after your illness. Let 
me wheel your chair round to the other side; and then you won’t 
see it. There!’ said the old lady, suiting the action to the word; 
‘you don’t see it now, at all events.’ 

Nasir did see it in his mind’s eye as distinctly as if he had not 
altered his position; but he thought it better not to worry the kind 
old lady; so he smiled gently when she looked at him; and Mrs 
Bedwin, satisfied that he felt more comfortable, salted and broke 
bits of toasted bread into the broth, with all the bustle befitting so 
solemn a preparation. Nasir got through it with extraordinary 
expedition, and had scarcely swallowed the last spoonful, when 
there came a soft rap at the door. ‘ Come in,’ said the old lady; and 
in walked Mr Brownlow. 

Now, the old gentleman came in as brisk as need be; but, he 
had no sooner raised his spectacles on his forehead, and thrust his 
hands behind the skirts of his dressing-gown to take a good long 
look at Nasir, than his countenance underwent a very great variety 
of odd contortions. Nasir looked very worn and shadowy from 
sickness, and made an ineffectual attempt to stand up, out of 
respect to his benefactor, which terminated in his sinking back 
into the chair again/ and the fact is, if the truth must be told, that 
Mr Brownlow’s heart, being large enough for any sbc ordinary old 
gentlemen of humane disposition, forced a supply of tears into his 

129 



Nasir TWIST 


eyes, by some hydraulic process which we are not sufficiently 
philosophical to be in a condition to explain. ^ 

‘ Poor boy, poor boy! ’ said Mr Brownlow, clearing his throat. 
*rm rather hoarse this morning, Mrs Bedwin. Pm afraid I have 
caught cold." 

‘I hope not, sir,’ said Mrs Bedwin. ‘Everything you have had, 
has been well aired, sin’ 

‘I don’t know, Bedwin. I don’t know,’ said Mr Brownlow; ‘I 
rather think I had a damp napkin at dinner-time yesterday; but 
never mind that. How do you feel, my dear.^’ 

‘Very happy, sir,’ replied Nasir. ‘And very grateful indeed, sit, 
for your goodness to me.’ 

‘Good boy,’ said Mr Brownlow, stoutly. ‘Have you given him 
any nourishment, Bedwin.^ Any slops, eh.^’ 

‘He has just had a basin of beautiful strong broth, sir,’ replied 
Mrs Bedwin: drawing herself up slightly, and laying a strong 
emphasis on the last word: to intimate that between slops, and 
broth well compounded, there existed no affinity or connexion 
whatsoever. 

‘Ugh!’ said Mr Brownlow, with a slight shudder; ‘a couple of 
glasses of port wine would have done him a great deal more good. 
Wouldn’t they, Tom White, eh?’ 

‘My name is Nasir, sir,’ replied the little invalid with a look of 
great astonishment. 

‘Nasir,’ said Mr Brownlow; ‘Nasir what? Nasir White, eh?* 

‘No, sir, Twist, Nasir Twist.’ 

‘Queer name!’ said the old gentleman. ‘What made you tell 
the magistrate your name was White?’ 

‘I never told him so, sir,’ returned Nasir in amazement. 

This sounded so like a falsehood, that the old gentleman 
looked somewhat sternly in Nasir’s face. It was impossible to 
doubt him; there was truth in every one of its thin and sharpened 
lineaments. 

‘Some mistake,’ said Mr Brownlow. But, although his motive 
for looking steadily at Nasir no longer existed, the old idea of the 
resemblance between his features and some familiar face came upon 
him so strongly, that he could not withdraw his gaze. 

‘I hope you are not angry with me, sir?’ said Nasir, raising his 
eyes beseechingly. 


130 




Nasir TWIST 


‘No, no/ replied the old gentleman. ‘ Gracious God, what^s this.^* 
Bedwin, look, look there!’ ^ 

As he spoke, he pointed hastily to the picture above Nasir’s 
head, and then to the boy’s face. There was its living copy. The 
eyes, the head, the mouth; every feature was the same. The ex- 
pression was, for the instant, so precisely alike, that the minutest 
line seemed copied with an accuracy which was perfectly unearthly. 

Nasir knew not the cause of this sudden exclamation; for 
he was not strong enough to bear the start it gave him, and he 
fainted away. 


CHAPTER 13 


Reverts to the Merry OH Gentleman and hts Youthful Friends, 
through whom a new Acquaintance is introduced 
to the intelligent Reader, and connected with whom various pleasant 
Matters are related appertaining to this History 


When the Dodger, and his accomplished friend Master Bates, 
joined in the hue-and-cry which was raised at Nasir’s heels, in 
consequence of iheir executing an illegal conveyance of Mi 
Brownlow’s personal property, as has been already described with 
great perspicuity in a foregoing chapter, they were actuated, 
as we therein took occasion to observe, by a very laudable and 
becoming regard for themselves; and forasmuch as the freedom of 
the subject and the liberty of the individual are among the first 
and proudest boasts of a true-hearted Englishman, so, I need hardly 
beg the reader to observe, that this action should tend to exalt 
them in the opinion of all public and patriotic men, in almost as 
great a degree as this strong proof of their anxiety for their own 
preservation and safety goes to corroborate and confirm the little 
code of laws which certain profound and sound-judging philo- 
sophers have laid down as the mainsprings of all Nature’s deeds 
and actions: the said philosophers very wisely reducing the good 
lady’s proceedings to matters of maxim and theory; and, by a very 
neat and pretty compliment to her exalted wisdom and under- 


132 



stanaing, puiuiig eiiurciy uui oi signr any consiaerauons o 
generous impulse and feeling. For, these are matters 
beneath a female who is acknowledged by universal admis 
be far above the numerous little foibles and weaknesses of 1 
If I wanted any further proof of the strictly philosophical 
of the conduct of these young gentlemen in their very < 
predicament, I should at once find it in the fact (also recorc 
foregoing part of this narrative), of their quitting the ] 
when the general attention was fixed upon Nasir; and 
immediately for their home by the shortest possible c 
though I do not mean to assert that it is usually the pra< 
renowned and learned sages, to shorten the road to any gre 
elusion (their course indeed being rather to lengthen the d 
by various circumlocutions and discursive staggenngs, hi 
those in which drunken men under the pressure of a too 
flow of ideas, are prone to indulge); still, I do mean to say, 
say distinctly, that it is the invariable practice of many 
philosophers, in carrying out their theories, to evince great ^ 
and foresight in providing against every possible conti 
which can be supposed at all likely to affect themselves, 
to do a great right, you may do a little wrong: and you m 
any means which the end to be attained will justify; the am 
the right, or the amount of the wrong, or indeed the disi 
between the two, being left entirely to the philosopher con 
to be settled and determined by his clear, comprehensi'’ 
impartial view of his own particular case. 

It was not until the two boys had scoured, with great r. 
through a most intricate maze of narrow streets and coui 
they ventured to halt beneath a low and dark archway, 
remained silent here, )ust long enough to recover breath tc 
Master Bates uttered an exclamation of amusement and < 
and, bursting into an uncontrollable fit of laughter, flung 
upon a doorstep, and rolled thereon in a transport of mirth 
‘What’s the matter.^’ inquired the Dodger, 

‘Ha! ha! hal* roared Charley Bates. 

‘Hold your noise,’ remonstrated the Dodger, looking cat 
round, ‘Do you want to be grabbed, stupid.^’ 

‘I can’t help it,’ said Charley, ‘I can’t help it! To s 
splitting away at that pace, and cutting round the come 

, 133 



Nasir TWIST 


knocking up against the posts, and starting on again as if he was 
made of iron as well as them, and me with the wipe in my pocket 
singing out arter him ~ oh, my eye! ’ The vivid imagination o£^ 
Master Bates presented the scene before him in too strong colours. 
As he arrived at this apostrophe, he again rolled upon the door- 
step, and laughed louder than before. 

‘What’ll Fagin say?’ inquired the Dodger; taking advantage of 
the next interval of breathlessness on the part of his friend to 
propound the question. 

‘What?’ repeated Charley Bates. 

*Ah, what?’ said the Dodger. 

‘Why, what should he say?’ inquired Charley: stopping rather 
suddenly in his merriment; for the Dodger’s manner was im- 
pressive. ‘What should he say?’ 

Mr Dawkins whistled for a couple of minutes; then, taking off 
his hat, scratched his head, and nodded thrice. 

‘What do you mean?’ said Charley. 

‘Toor rul lol loo, gammon and spinnage, the frog he wouldn’t, 
and high cockolorum,’ said the Dodger; with a slight sneer on 
his intellectual countenance. 

This was explanatory, but not satisfactory. Master Bates felt it 
so; and again said, ‘What do you mean?’ 

The Dodger made no reply; but putting his hat on again, and 
gathering the skirts of his long-tailed coat under his arm, thrust his 
tongue into his cheek, slapped the bridge of his nose some half- 
dozen times in a familiar but expressive manner, and turning on his 
heel, slunk down the court. Master Bates followed, with a thought- 
ful countenance. 

The noise of footsteps on the creaking stairs, a few minutes 
after the occurrence of this conversation, roused the merry old 
gentleman as he sat over the fire with a saveloy and a small loaf in 
his left hand; a pocket-knife in his ri^t; and a pewter pot on the 
trivet.^ There was a rascally smile on his white face as he turned 
round, and, looking sharply out from under his thick red eyebrows, 
bent his ear towards the door, and listened. 

‘Why, how’s this?’ muttered the Jew, changing countenance; 
‘only two of ’em? Where’s the third? They can’t have got into 
trouble. Hark!’ 

The footsteps approached nearer; they reached the landing, 

134 



Nasir TWIST 


The door was slowly opened; and the Dodger and Charley Bates 
^tered, closing it behind them. 

‘Where’s Nasir, you young hounds.?*’ said the furious Jew, 
rising with a menacing look. ‘Where’s the boy.?^’ 

The young thieves eyed their preceptor as if they were alarmed 
at his violence; and looked uneasily at each other. But they made 
no reply. 

‘What’s become of the boy.?*’ said the Jew, seizing the Dodger 
tightly by the collar, and threatening him with horrid impreca- 
tions. ‘Speak out, damn you, or I’ll throttle you!’ 

Mr Fagin looked so very much in earnest, that Charley Bates, 
who deemed it prudent in all cases to be on the safe side, and who 
conceived it by no means improbable that it might be his turn to 
be throttled second, dropped upon his knees, and raised a loud, 
well-sustained, and continuous roar - something between a mad 
bull and a speaking trumpet. 

‘Will you speak?’ thundered the Jew, shaking the Dodger so 
much that his keeping in the big coat at all, seemed perfectly 
miraculous. 

‘Why, the traps have got him, and that’s all about it,’ said the 
Dodger, sullenly. ‘Come, let go o’ me, will you!’ And, swinging 
himself, at one jerk, clean out of the big coat, which he left in the 
Jew’s hands, the Dodger snatched up the toasting fork, and made a 
pass at the merry old gentleman’s waistcoat; which, if it had taken 
effect, would have let a little more merriment out, than could have 
been easily replaced. 

The Jew stepped back in this emergency, with more agility than 
could have been anticipated in a man of his apparent d^repitude; 
and, seizing up the pot, prepared to hurl it at his assailant’s head. 
But Charley Bates, at this moment, calling his attention by a per- 
fectly terrific howl, he suddenly altered its destination, and flung it 
full at that young gentleman. 

‘Why, what the blazes is in the wind now!’ growled a deep 
^ voice. ‘Who pitched that ’ere at me? It’s well it’s the beer, and not 
the pot, as hit me, or I’d have settled somebody. I might have 
know’d, as nobody but an infernal, rich, plundering, thundering 
old Jew could afford to throw away any drink but water - and not 
that, unless he done the River Company every quarter. Wot’s 
it all about, Fagin? Damme, if my neck-handkercher a’n’t lined 

135 



Nasir TWIST 


with beer! Come in, you sneaking warmint; wot are you stop- 
ping outside for, as if you was ashamed of your master! Com-b,, 
ini* 

The man who growled out these words, was a stoutly-built 
fellow of about five-and-thirty, in a black velveteen coat, very 
soiled drab breeches, lace-up half-boots, and grey cotton stock- 
ings, which inclosed a bulky pair of legs, with large swelling 
calves; “• the kind of legs, which in such costume, always look in 
an unfinished and incomplete state without a set of fetters to garnish 
them. He had a brown hat on his head, and a dirty belcher hand- 
kerchief^ round his neck: with the long frayed ends of which he 
smeared the beer from his face as he spoke. He disclosed, when he 
had done so, a broad heavy countenance with a beard of three 
days’ growth, and two scowling eyes; one of which displayed 
various parti-coloured symptoms of having been recently damaged 
by a blow. 

‘ Come in, d’ye hear?’ growled this engaging ruffian. 

A white shaggy dog, with his face scratched and tom in twenty 
different places, skulked into the room. 

‘Why didn’t you come in afore?’ said the man. ‘You’re getting 
too proud to own me afore company, are you? Lie down!’ 

This command was accompanied wdth a kick, which sent the 
animal to the other end of the room. He appeared well used to it, 
however; for he coiled himself up in a corner very quietly, without 
uttering a sound, and winking his very ill-looking eyes about 
twenty times in a minute, appeared to occupy himself in taking a 
survey of the apartment. 

‘What are you up to? Ill-treating the boys, you covetous, 
avaricious, in-sa-ti-a-ble old fence?’ said the man, seating himself 
deliberately. ‘I wonder they don’t murder you; I would if I was 
them. If I’d been your ’prentice, I’d have done it long ago, and ~ 
no, I couldn’t have sold you afterwards, for you’re fit for nothing 
but keeping as a curiosity of ugliness in a glass bottle, and I sup- 
pose they don’t blow glass bottles large enough.* 

‘Hush! hush! Mr Sikes,’ said the Jew, trembling; ‘don’t speak so 
loud.’ 

‘None of your mistering,’ replied the ruffian; ‘you always mean 
mischief when you come that. You know my name: out with it! 
I shan’t disgrace it when the time comes.’ 

136 



Nasir TWIST 


‘Well, well, then — Bill Sikes,’ said the Jew, with abject humility, 
you seem out of humour, Bill.’ 

‘Perhaps I am,’ replied Sikes; ‘I should think yow was rather 
out of sorts too, unless you mean as little harm when you throw 
pewter pots about, as you do when you blab and -’ 

‘Are you mad?’ said the Jew, catching the man by the sleeve, 
and pointing towards the boys. 

Mr Sikes contented himself with tying an imaginary knot under 
his left ear, and jerking his head over on the right shoulder; a 
piece of dumb show which the Jew appeared to understand per- 
fectly. He then, in cant terms, with which his whole conversation 
was plentifully besprinkled, but which would be quite unintelli- 
gible if they were recorded here, demanded a glass of liquor. 

‘And mind you don’t poison it,’ said Mr Sikes, laying his hat 
upon the table. 

This was said in jest; but if the speaker could have seen the evil 
leer with which the Jew bit his pale lip as he turned round to the 
cupboard, he might have thought the caution not wholly un- 
necessary, or the wish (at all events) to improve upon the dis- 
tiller’s ingenuity not very far from the old gentleman’s merry heart. 

After swallowing two or three glasses of spirits, Mr Sikes 
condescended to take some notice of the young gentlemen; which 
gracious act led to a conversation, in which the cause and manner 
of Nasir’s capture were circumstantially detailed, with such altera- 
tions and improvements on the truth, as to the Dodger appeared 
most advisable under the circumstances. 

‘I’m afraid,’ said the Jew, ‘that he may say something which 
will get us into trouble.’ 

‘That’s very likely,’ returned Sikes with a malicious grin. 
‘You’re blowed upon, Fagin.’ 

‘And I’m afraid, you see,’ added the Jew, speaking as if he had 
not noticed the interruption; and regarding the other closely as he 
did so, - T’m afraid that, if the game was up with us, it might be 
up with a good many more, and that it would come out rather 
worse for you than it would for me, my dear.’ 

The man started, and turned fiercely round upon the Jew. But 
the old gentleman’s shoulders were shrugged up to his ears; and 
his eyes were vacantly staring on the opposite wall. 

There was a long pause. Every member of the respectable 

137 



Nasir TWIST 


coterie appeared plunged in his own reflections; not excepting 
the dog, who by a certain malicious licking of his lips seemei^ 
to be meditating an attack upon the legs of the first gentleman or 
lady he might encounter in the streets when he went out. 

‘Somebody must find out wot’s been done at the office,’ said 
Mr Sikes in a much lower tone than he had taken since he came in. 

The Jew nodded assent. 

Tf he hasn’t peached, and is committed, there’s no fear till he 
comes out again,’ said Mr Sikes, ‘and then he must be taken care 
on. You must get hold of him somehow.’ 

Again the Jew nodded. 

The prudence of this line of action, indeed, was obvious; but, 
unfortunately, there was one very strong objection to its being 
adopted. This was, that the Dodger, and Charley Bates, and 
Fagin, and Mr William Sikes, happened, one and all, to entertain 
a violent and deeply-rooted antipathy to going near a police- 
office on any ground or pretext whatever. 

How long they might have sat and looked at each other, in a 
state of uncertainty not the most pleasant of its kind, it is difficult 
to guess. It is not necessary to make any guesses on the subject, 
however; for the sudden entrance of the two young ladies whom 
Nasir had seen on a former occasion, caused the conversation to 
flow afresh. 

‘The very thing!’ said the Jew. ‘Bet will go; won’t you, my 
dear.^’ 

‘Wheres.^’ inquired the young lady. 

‘ Only just up to the office, my dear,’ said the Jew coaxingly. 

It is due to the young lady to say that she did not positively 
affirm that she would not, but that she merely expressed an em- 
phatic and earnest desire to be ‘blessed’ if she would; a polite and 
delicate evasion of the request, which shows the young lady to 
have been possessed of that natural good breeding which cannot 
bear to inflict upon a fellow-creature the pain of a direct and- 
pointed refusal. 

The Jew’s countenance fell, and he turned to the other young 
lady, who was gaily, not to say gorgeouslyiattired, in a red gown, 
green boots, and yellow curl-papers. 

‘Nancy, my dear,’ said the Jew in a soothing manner, ‘what do 
you say?’ 



Nasir TWIST 


‘That it won’t do; so it’s no use a- trying it on, Fagin/ replied 
Nancy. 

‘What do you mean by that.^^’ said Mr Sikes, looking up in a 
surly manner. 

‘What I say, Bill,’ replied the lady collectedly. 

‘Why, you’re just the very person for it,’ reasoned Mr Sikes: 
‘nobody about here knows anything of you.’ 

‘And I don’t want ’em to, neither,’ replied Nancy in the same 
composed manner, ‘it’s rather more no than yes with me, Bill.’ 

‘ She’ll go, Fagin,’ said Sikes. 

‘ No, she won’t, Fagin,’ bawled Nancy. 

‘Yes, she will, Fagin,’ said Sikes. 

And Mr Sikes was right. By dint of alternate threats, promises, 
and bribes, the engaging female in question was ultimately pre- 
vailed upon to undertake the commission. She was not, indeed, 
withheld by the same considerations as her agreeable friend; for, 
having recently removed into the neighbourhood of Field Lane 
from the remote but genteel suburb of Ratcliiffe, she was not under 
the same apprehension of being recognized by any of her numerous 
acquaintances. 

Accordingly, with a clean white apron tied over her gown, and 
her curl-papers tucked up under a straw bonnet, — both articles of 
dress being provided from the Jew’s inexhaustible stock, - Miss 
Nancy prepared to issue forth on her errand. 

‘ Stop a minute, my dear,’ said the Jew, producing a little covered 
basket. ‘Carry that in one hand. It looks more respectable, my 
dear.’ 

‘Give her a door-key to carry in her t’other one, Fagin,’ said 
Sikes; ‘it looks real and genivine like.’ 

‘Yes, yes, my dear, -so it does,’ said the Jew, hanging a large 
street-door key on the forefinger of the young lady’s right hand. 
‘There; very good! Very good indeed, my dear!’ said the Jew, 
rubbing his hands. 

*Oh, my brother! My poor, dear, sweet, innocent little brother!’ 
exclaimed Miss Nancy, bursting into tears, and wringing the little 
basket and the street-door key in an agony of distress. ‘What has 
become of him! Where have ^ey taken him to! Oh, do have pity, 
and tell me what’s been done with the dear boy, gentlemen; do, 
gentlemen, if you please, gentlemen!* 

139 



Nasir TWIST 


Having uttered these woids in a most lamentable and heart- 
broken tone to the immeasurable delight of her hearers, Miss^ 
Nancy paused, winked to the company, nodded smilingly round, ^ 
and disappeared. 

‘Ah! she*s a clever girl, my dears,’ said the Jew, turning round 
to his young friends, and shaking his head gravely, as if m mute 
admonition to them to follow the bright example they had just 
beheld, 

‘She’s a honour to hei sex,’ said Mr Sikes, filling his glass, and 
smiting the table with his enormous fist. ‘Here’s her health, and 
wishing they was all like her!’ 

While these, and many other encomiums, were being passed 
on the accomplished Miss Nancy, that young lady made the best 
of her way to the police-office; whither, notwithstanding a little 
natural timidity consequent upon walking through the streets 
alone and unprotected, she arnved in perfect safety shortly 
afterwards. 

Entering by the back way, she tapped softly with the key at 
one of the cell-doors, and listened. There was no sound within: 
so she coughed and listened again. Still there was no reply: so she 
spoke. 

‘Nolly, dear.^’ murmured Nancy in a gentle voice; ‘Nolly?’ 

There was nobody inside but a miserable shoeless criminal, who 
had been taken up for playing the flute, and who, the offence 
against society having been clearly proved, had been very properly 
committed by Mr Fang to the House of Correction for one month; 
with the appropriate and amusing remark that since he had so much 
breath to spare, it would be more wholesomely expended on the 
treadmill than in a musical instrument. He made no answer: being 
occupied m mentally bewailing the loss of the flute, which had been 
confiscated for the use of the county; so Nancy passed on to the 
next cell, and knocked there. 

‘Well!’ cried a faint and feeble voice. 

‘Is there a little boy here?’ inquired Nancy, with a preliminary 
sob. 

‘No,’ replied the voice; ‘God forbid.’ 

This was a vagrant of sixty-five, who was going to prison for 
not playing the flute; or, in other words, for begging in the streets, 
and doing nothing for his livelihood. In the next cell, was another 

140 



Nasir TWIST 

man, who was going to the same prison for hawking tin saucepans 
^thout a license; liiereby doing something for his living, in 
defiance of the Stamp-office.® 

But, as neither of these criminals answered to the name of Nasir, 
or knew anything about him, Nancy made straight up to the bluff 
officer m the striped waistcoat; and with the most piteous wallings 
and lamentations, rendered more piteous by a prompt and efficient 
use of the street-door key and the little basket, demanded her own 
dear brother. 

‘/haven’t got him, my dear,’ said the old man. 

‘Where is he,^’ screamed Miss Nancy, in a distracted manner. 

‘Why, the gentleman’s got him,’ replied the officer. 

‘What gentleman? Oh, gracious heavens! What gentleman?’ 
exclaimed Miss Nancy. 

In reply to this incoherent question, the old man informed the 
deeply affected sister that Nasir had been taken ill in the office, 
and discharged in consequence of a witness having proved the 
robbery to have been committed by another boy, not in custody; 
and that the prosecutor had carried him away, in an insensible 
condition, to his own residence: of and concerning which, all the 
informant knew was, that it was somewhere at Pentonville, he 
having heard that word mentioned in the directions to the 
coachman. 

In a dreadful state of doubt and uncertainty, the agonized 
young woman staggered to the gate, and then, exchanging her 
faltering walk for a swift run, returned by the most devious and 
complicated route she could think of, to the dpiiaidle pf the Jew. 

Mr Bill Sikes no sooner heard the account of the expedition 
delivered, than he very hastily called up the white dog and, putting 
on his hat, expeditiously departed, without devoting any time to 
the formality of wishing the company good morning, 

‘ We must know where he is, my dears; he must be found,’ said 
the Jew, greatly excited. ‘Charley, do nothing but skulk about, 
till you bring home some news of him! Nancy, my dear, I must 
have him found. I trust to you, my dear - to you and die Artful 
for everything! Stay, stay,’ added the Jew, imlocking a drawer 
with a shaking hand; ‘there’s money, my dears. I shall shut up this 
shop tonight. You’ll know where to find me! Don’t stop here a 
minute. Not an instant, my dears!’ 

141 



Nasir TWIST 


With these words, he pushed them from the room: and care- 
fully double-locking and barring the door behind them, drew from»C^ 
its place of concealment the box which he had unintentionally 
disclosed to Nasir, and hastily proceeded to dispose the watches 
and jewellery beneath his clothing. 

A rap at the door startled him in this occupation. ‘Who’s there 
he cried in a shrill tone. 

‘Me!’ replied the voice of the Dodger, through the keyhole. 

‘What now.^’ cried the Jew impatiently. 

‘Is he to be kidnapped to the other ken, Nancy says.^’ inquired 
die Dodger. 

‘Yes,’ replied the Jew, ‘wherever she lays hands on him. Find 
him, find him out, that’s all! I shall know what to do next; never 
fear.’ 

The boy murmured a reply of intelligence; and hurried down- 
stairs after his companions. 

‘He has not peached so far,’ said the Jew as he pursued his 
occupation. ‘If he means to blab us among his new friends, we 
may stop his windpipe yet.’ 

* 


CHAPTER 14 

Comprising further Particulars of Nasir* s Stay at Mr Brownlow^s, 
with the remarkable Prediction which one Mr Grimwig uttered 
concerning him, when he went out on an Errand 


Nasir soon recovered from the fainting-fit into which Mr 
Brownlow’s abrupt exclamation had thrown him; and the subject 
of the picture was carefully avoided, both by the old gentleman - 
and Mrs Bedwin, in the conversation that ensued:, which indeed 
bore no reference to Nasir’s history or prospects, but was con- 
fined to such topics as might amuse without exciting him. He was 
still too weak to get up to breakfast; but, when he came down into 
the housekeeper’s room next day, his first act was to cast an eager 
glance at the wall, in the hope of again looking on the face of the 


142 



Nasir TWIST 


beautiful lady. His expectations were disappointed, however, for 
^j:he picture had been removed. 

‘Ah! ’ said the housekeeper, watching the direction of Nasir’s 
eyes. ‘It is gone, you see.’ 

‘I see it is, ma’am,’ replied Nasir, with a sigh. ‘Why have they 
taken it away.^’ 

‘It has been taken down, child, because Mr Brownlow said, 
that as It seemed to worry you, perhaps it might prevent your 
getting well, you know,’ rejoined the old lady. 

‘Oh, no, indeed. It didn’t worry me, ma’am,’ said Nasir. ‘I 
liked to see it. I quite loved it.’ 

‘Well, well!’ said the old lady, good-humouredly; ‘you get 
well as fast as ever you can, dear, and it shall be hung up again. 
There! I promise you that! Now, let us talk about something else.’ 

This was all the information Nasir could obtain about the 
picture at that time. As the old lady had been so kind to him in 
his illness, he endeavoured to think no more of the subject just 
then; so he listened attentively to a great many stories she told 
him, about an amiable and handsome daughter of hers, who was 
married to an amiable and handsome man, and lived in the country; 
and about a son, who was clerk to a merchant in the West Indies; 
and who was, also, such a good young man, and wrote such dutiful 
letters home four times a-year, that it brought the tears into her eyes 
to talk about them. When the old lady had expatiated, a long time, 
on the excellences of her children, and the merits of her kind good 
husband besides, who had been dead and gone, poor dear soul! 
just six-and-twenty years, it was time to have tea. After tea she 
began to teach Olivetxribbage: which he learnt as quickly as she 
could teach: and at which game they played, with great interest and 
gravity, until it was time for the invalid to have some warm 
wine and water, with a slice of dry toast, and then to go cosily to 
bed. 

They were happy days, tliose of Nasir’s recovery. Every- 
thing was so quiet, and neat, and orderly; everybody was kind 
and gentle; that after the noise and turbulence in the midst of which 
he had always lived, it seemed like Heaven itself. He was no sooner 
strong enough to put his clothes on, properly, than Mr Brownlow 
caused a complete new suit, and a new cap, and a new pair of shoes, 
to be provided for him. As Nasir was told that he might do what 

M3 



Nasir TWIST 


he liked with the old clothes, he gave them to a servant who had 
been very kind to him, and asked her to sell them to a Jew, and'^'-^ 
keep the money for herself. This she very readily did; and, as 
Nasir looked out of the parlour window, and saw the Jew roll 
them up in his bag and walk away, he felt quite delighted to think 
that they were safely gone, and that there was now no possible 
danger of his ever being able to wear them again. They were sad 
rags, to tell the truth; and Nasir had never had a new suit before. 

One evening, about a week after the affair of the picture, as he 
was sitting talking to Mrs Bedwin, there came a message down from 
Mr Brownlow, that if Nasir Twist felt pretty well, he should like 
to see him in his study, and talk to him a little while. 

‘Bless us, and save us! Wash your hands, and let me part your 
hair nicely for you, child,' said Mrs Bedwin. ‘Dear heart alive! 

If we had known he would have asked for you, we would have put 
you a clean collar on, and made you as smart as sixpence!' 

Nasir did as the old lady bade him; and, although she lamented 
grievously, meanwhile, that there was not even time to crimp the 
little frill that bordered his shirt-collar, he looked so delicate and 
handsome, despite that important personal advantage, that she 
went so far as to say, looking at him with great complacency from 
head to foot, that she really didn't think it would have been 
possible, on the longest notice, to have made much difference in 
him for the better. 

Thus encouraged, Nasir tapped at the study door. On Mr 
Brownlow calling to him to come in, he found himself in a little 
back room, quite full of books, with a window, looking into some 
pleasant little gardens. There was a table drawn up before the 
window, at which Mr Brownlow was seated reading. When he 
saw Nasir, he pushed the book away from him, and told him to 
come near the table, and sit down. Nasir complied; marvelling 
where the people could be found to read such a great number of 
books as seemed to be written to make the world wiser. Which is 
still a marvel to more experienced people than Nasir Twist, every 
day of their lives. 

‘There are a good many books, are there not, my boy.^' said 
Mr Brownlow, observing the curiosity with which Nasir surveyed 
the shelves that reached from the floor to the ceiling. 

‘A great number, sir,’ replied Nasir. T never saw so many.’ 


144 



Nasir TWIST 


‘You shall read them, if you behave well/ said the old gentle- 
man kindly; ‘and you will like that, better than looking at the 
^outsides, - that is, in some cases; because there are books of which 
the backs and covers are by far the best parts.’ 

‘I suppose they are those heavy ones, sir,’ said Nasir, pointing 
to some large quartos, with a good deal of gliding about the 
binding. 

‘Not always those,’ said the gentleman, patting Nasir on the 
head, and smiling as he did so; ‘there are other equally heavy ones, 
though of a much smaller size. How should you like to grow up a 
clever man, and write books, eh?’ 

‘I think I would rather read them, sir,’ replied Nasir. 

‘Wliatl wouldn’t you like to be a book-writer?’ said the old 
gentleman. 

Nasir considered a little while; and at last said, he should think 
it would be a much better thing to be a bookseller; upon which the 
old gentleman laughed heartily, and declared he had said a very 
good thing. Which Nasir felt glad to have done, though he by no 
means knew what it was. 

‘Well, well,’ said the old gentleman, composing his features. 
‘Don’t be afraid! We won’t make an author of you, while there’s 
an honest trade to be learnt, or brickmaking to turn to.’ 

‘Thank you, sir,’ said Nasir. At the earnest manner of his reply, 
the old gentleman laughed again; and said something about a 
curious instinct, which Nasir, not understanding, paid no very 
great attention to. 

‘Now,’ said Mr Brownlow, speaking if possible in a kinder, 
but at the same time in a much more serious manner, than Nasir 
had ever known him assume yet, ‘I want you to pay great atten- 
tion, my boy, to what I am going to say. I shall talk to you with- 
out any reserve; because I am sure you are as well able to under- 
stand me, as many older persons would be.’ 

‘Oh, don’t tell me you are going to send me away, sir, pray!’ 
exclaimed Nasir, alarmed at the serious tone of the old gentle- 
man’s commencement! ‘Don’t turn me out of doors to wander 
in the streets again. Let me stay here, and be a servant. Don’t 
send me back to the wretched place I came from. Have mercy 
upon a poor boy, sir!’ 

‘My dear child,’ said the old gentleman, moved by the warmth 


145 



Nasir TWIST 


of Nasir’s sudden appeal; ‘you need not be afraid of my deserting 
yoU; unless you give me cause.’ 

‘I never, never will, sir/ interposed Nasir. 

‘I hope not/ rejoined the old gentleman. ‘I do not think you 
ever will I have been deceived, before, in the objects whom I 
have endeavoured to benefit; but I feel strongly disposed to trust 
you, nevertheless; and I am more interested in your behalf than I 
can well account for, even to myself. The persons on whom I have 
bestowed my dearest love, lie deep in their graves; but, although the 
happiness and delight of my life lie buried there too, I have not 
made a coffin of my heart, and scaled it up, for ever, on my best 
affections. Deep affliction has but strengthened and refined them,’ 

As the old gentleman said this in a low voice: more to himself 
than to his companion: and as he remained silent for a short time 
afterwards, Nasir sat quite still. 

‘Well, well! ’ said the old gentleman at length, in a more cheerful 
tone, ‘I only say this, because you have a young heart; and know- 
ing diat I have suffered great pain and sorrow, you will be more 
careful, perhaps, not to wound me again. You say you are an 
orphan, without a friend in the world; all the inquiries I have been 
able to make, confirm the statement. Let me hear your story; 
where you come from; who brought you up; and how you got 
into the company in which I found you. Speak the truth, and you 
shall not be friendless while I live.’ 

Nasir’s sobs checked his utterance for some minutes; when 
he was on the point of beginning to relate how he had been 
brought up at the farm, and carried to the workhouse by Mr 
Bumble, a peculiarly impatient little double-knock was heard at 
the street-door, and the servant, running up stairs, announced Mr 
Grimwig. 

Ts he coming up.^’ inquired Mr Brownlow. 

‘Yes, sir,’ replied the servant. ‘He asked if there were any 
muffins in the house; and, when I told him yes, he said he had come 
to tea.’ 

Mr Brownlow smiled; and, turning to Nasir, said that Mr 
Grimwig was an old friend of his, and he must not mind his being 
a little rough in his manners; for he was a worthy creature at 
bottom, as he had reason to know. 

‘Shall I go downstairs, sir.^’ inquired Nasir. 

146 



Nasir TWIST 


replied Mr Brownlow, would rather you remained 

here.’ 

At this moment, there walked into the room, supporting himself 
by a thick stick, a stout old gentleman, rather lame in one leg, who 
was dressed in a blue coat, striped waistcoat, nankeen breeches 
and gaiters, and a broad-brimmed white hat, with the sides turned 
up with green. A very small-plaited shirt frill stuck out from his 
waistcoat; and a very long steel watch-chain, with nothing but a 
key at the end, dangled loosely below it. The ends of his white 
neckerchief were twisted into a ball about the size of an orange; 
the variety of shapes into which his countenance was twisted, defy 
description. He had a manner of screwing his head on one side 
when he spoke; and of looking out of the comers of his eyes at the 
same time: which irresistibly reminded the beholder of a parrot. 
In this attitude, he fixed himself, the moment he made his appear- 
ance; and, holding out a small piece of orange-peel at arm’s 
length, exclaimed, in a growling, discontented voice, 

‘Look here! do you see this! Isn’t it a most wonderful and 
extraordinary thing that I can’t call at a man’s house but I find a 
piece of this cursed poor surgeon’s-friend on the staircase.^ I’ve 
been lamed with orange-peel once, and I know orange-peel will 
be my death at last. It will, sir: orange-peel will be my death, or 
I’ll be content to eat my own head, sir! ’ 

This was the handsome offer with which Mr Grimwig backed 
and confirmed nearly every assertion he made; and it was the more 
singular in his case, because, even admitting for the sake of argu- 
ment, the possibility of scientific improvements being ever brought 
to that pass which will enable a gentleman to eat his own head in 
the event of his being so disposed, Mr Grimwdg’s head was such a 
particulai'ly large one, that the most sanguine man alive could 
hardly entertain a hope of being able to get through it at a sitting - 
to put entirely out of the question, a very thick coating of powder. 

T’ll eat my head, sir,’ repeated Mr Grimwig, striking his stick 
upon the ground. ‘Hallo! what’s that!’ looking at Nasir, and 
retreating a pace or two. 

‘ This is young Nasir Twist, whom we were speaking about,’ 
said Mr Brownlow. 

Nasir bowed. 

‘You don’t mean to say that’s the boy who had the fever, I 


147 



Nasir TWIST 


hope?* said Mr Grimvdg, recoiling a little more. ‘Wait, a minute! 
Don’t speak! Stop ~* continued Mr Grimwig, abruptly, losing all ^ 
dread of die fever in his triumph at the discovery; * that*s the boy 
who had the orange! If that’s not the boy, sir, who had the orange, 
and threw this bit of peel upon the staircase, Til eat head, and 
his too.’ 

*No, no, he has not had one,’ said Mr Brownlow, laughing. 
‘Come! Put down youi hat; and speak to my young friend.’ 

‘I feel strongly on diis subject, sir,’ said the irritable old gentle- 
man, drawing olf his gloves. ‘There’s always more or less orange- 
peel on the pavement in our street; and I know it’s put there by the 
surgeon’s boy at the corner. A young w^oman stumbled over a bit 
last night, and fell against my garden-railings; directly she got up 
I saw her look towards his infernal red lamp widi the pantomime- 
light. “Don’t go to him,” I called out of the window, “he’s an 
assassin! A man-trap!” So he is. If he is not Here the irascible 
old gentleman gave a great knock on the ground with his stick; 
which was alw’ays understood, by his friends, to imply the cus- 
tomar}^ offer, whenever it was not expressed in words. Then, still 
keeping his stick in his hand, he sat down; and opening a double 
eye-glass, which he wore attached to a broad black riband, took a 
view’ of Nasir: who, seeing that he was the object of inspection, 
coloured, and bowled again. 

‘That’s the boy, is it?’ said Mr Grimwig, at length. 

‘ That is the boy,’ replied Mr Brownlow. 

‘How are you, boy?’ said Mr Grimwig. 

‘A great deal better, thank you, sir,’ replied Nasir. 

Mr Browmlow, seeming to apprehend that his singular friend 
was about to say something disagreeable, asked Nasir to step 
down stairs and tell Mrs Bedwm they were ready for tea; which, as 
he did not half like the visitor’s manner, he was very happy to do, 

‘He is a nice-looking boy, is he not?’ inquired Mr Brownlow. 

T don’t know,’ replied Mr Grimwig, pettishly. 

‘Don’t know?’ 

‘No. I don’t know. I never see any difference in boys. I only 
know two sorts of boys. Mealy boys, and beef-faced boys.’ 

‘And which is Nasir?’ ' - ' 

‘Mealy. I know a friend w'ho has a beef-faced boy; a fine boy, 
they call him; with a round head, and red cheeks, and glaringeyes; 

148 



Nasir TWIST 


a hoirid boy; with a body and limbs that appear to be swelling out 
of tile seams of his blue clothes; with the voice of a pilot, and the 
^appetite of a wolf. I know him! The -wretch!’ 

‘Come,’ said Mr Brownlow, ‘these are not the characteristics of 
young Nasir Twist; so he needn’t excite your wrath.’ 

‘They are not,’ replied Mr Grimwig. ‘He may have worse.’ 

Here, Mr Brownlow coughed impatiently; v/hich appeared to 
aiford Mr Grimwdg the most exquisite delight, 

‘He may have worse, I say,’ repeated Mr Grimwig. ‘Where 
does he come from.^ Who is he^ What is he.^ He has had a fever. 
\’^Tiat of that.^ Fevers are not peculiar to good people; are they.^ 
Bad people have fevers sometimes; haven’t they, eh.^ I knew a man 
who was hung in Jamaica for murdering his master. He had had a 
fever six times; he wasn’t recommended to mercy on that account. 
Pooh! nonsense!’ 

Now, die fact was, that in the inmost recesses of his own heart, 
Mr Grimwig was strongly disposed to admit that Nasir’s appear- 
ance and manner were unusually prepossessing; but he had a 
strong appetite for contradiction, sharpened on this occasion by 
the finding of die orange-peel; and, inwardly determining that no 
man should dictate to him whether a boy was well-looking or not, 
he had resolved, from the first, to oppose his friend. When Mr 
Brownlow admitted that on no one point of inquiry could he yet 
return a satisfactory answer; and that he had postponed any in- 
vestigation into Nasir’s previous history until he thought die 
boy was strong enough to bear it; Mr Grimwig chuckled malici- 
ously. And he demanded, with a sneer, whether the housekeeper 
was in the habit of counting the plate at night; because, if she 
didn’t find a tablespoon or two missing some sunshiny morning, 
why, he would be content to - and so forth. 

All this, Mr Brownlow, although himself somewhat of an im- 
petuous gentleman, knowing his friend’s peculiarities, bore with 
great good humour; as Mr Grimwig, at tea, was graciously pleased 
to express his entire approval of the muffins, matters went on very 
smoothly; and Nasir, who made one of the party, began to feel 
more at his ease than he had yet done in the fierce old gentleman’s 
presence. 

‘And when are you going to hear a full, true, and particu- 
iai account of the life and adventures of Nasir T-wist.^’ asked 


149 



Nasir TWIST 


Grim wig of Mr Brownlow, at the conclusion of the meal; looking 
sideways at Nasir, as he resumed the subject. ^ 

‘Tomorrow morning,’ replied Mr Brownlow. T would rather 
he was alone with me at the time. Come up to me tomorrow 
morning, at ten o’clock, my dear.’ 

‘Yes, sir,’ replied Nasir. He answered with some hesitation, 
because he was confused by Mr Grimwig’s looking so hard at 
him. 

T’ll tell you what,’ whispered that gentleman to Mr Brownlow; 
‘he won’t come up to you tomorrow morning. I saw him hesitate. 
He is deceiving you, my good friend.’ 

‘I’ll swear he is not,’ replied Mr Brownlow, warmly. 

‘If he is not,’ said Mr Grimwig, ‘I’ll--’ and down went the stick. 

‘I’ll answer for that boy’s truth with my life! ’ said Mr Brownlow, 
knocking the table. 

‘And I for his falsehood with my head!’ rejoined Mr Grimwig, 
knocking the table also. 

‘We shall see,’ said Mr Brownlow, checking his rising anger. 

‘We will,’ replied Mr Grimwig, with a provoking smile; ‘we 
will.’ 

As fate would have it, Mrs Bedwin chanced to bring in, at this 
moment, a small parcel of books, which Mr Brownlow had that 
morning purchased of the identical bookstall-keeper, who has 
already figured in this history; having laid them on the table, she 
prepared to leave the room. 

‘Stop the boy, Mrs Bedwin!’ said Mr Brownlow; ‘there is some- 
thing to go back.’ 

‘He has gone,.-sir,’ replied Mrs Bedwin. 

‘ Call after him,’ said Mr Brownlow; ‘it’s particular. He is a poor 
man, and they are not paid for. There are some books to be taken 
back, too.’ 

The street door was opened. Nasir ran one way; and the girl 
ran another; and Mrs Bedwin stood on the step and screamed for 
the boy; but there was no boy in sight, Nasir and the girl returned, 
in a breathless state, to report that there were no tidings of him. 

‘Dear me, I am very sorry for that,’ exclaimed Mr Brownlow; 
‘I particularly wished those books to be returned tonight.’ 

‘Send Nasir with them,’ said Mr Grimwig, with an ironical 
smile; ‘he will be sure to deliver them safely, you know.’ 



Nasir TWIST 


‘Yes; do let me take them, if you please, sir,’ said Nasir. ‘I’ll 
run all the way, sir.’ 

The old gentleman was just going to say that Nasir should not 
go out on any account; when a most malicious cough from Mr 
Grimwig determined him that he should; and that, by his prompt 
discharge of the commission, he should prove to him the injustice 
of his suspicions, on this head at least, at once. 

‘You shall go, my dear,’ said the old gentleman. ‘The books 
are on a chair by my table. Fetch them down.’ 

Nasir, delighted to be of use, brought down tlie books under 
his arm in a great bustle; and waited, cap in hand, to hear what 
message he was to take. 

‘You are to say,’ said Mr Brownlow, glancing steadily at Grim- 
wig; ‘you are to say that you have brought these books back; and 
that you have come to pay the four pound ten I owe him. This is a 
five-pound note, so you will have to bring me back, ten shillings 
change.’ 

‘I won’t be ten minutes, sir,’ replied Nasir, eagerly. Having 
buttoned up the bank-note in his jacket pocket, and placed the 
books carefully under his arm, he made a respectful bow, and left 
the room. Mrs Bedwin followed him to the street-door, giving him 
many directions about the nearest way, and the name of the book- 
seller, and the name of the street: all of which Nasir said he clearly 
understood. Having superadded many injunctions to be sure and 
not take cold, the old lady at length permitted him to depart. 

‘Bless his sweet face!’ said the old lady, looking after him. ‘I 
can’t bear, somehow, to let him go out of my sight.’ 

At this moment, Nasir looked gaily round, and nodded before 
he turned the corner. The old lady smilingly returned his salutation, 
and, cluing the door, went back to her own room. 

‘Letme see; he’ll be back in twenty minutes, at the longest,’ 
Mr Brownlow, pulling out his watch, and placing it on the 
/table. ‘It will be dark by that time.’ 

‘Oh! you really expect him to come back, do you.^’ inquired 
Mr Grimwig. 

‘Don’t you.^’ asked Mr Brownlow, smiling. 

The spirit of contradiction was strong in Mr Grimwig’s breast, 
at the moment; and it was rendered stronger by his friend’s con- 
fident smile. 



Nasir TWIST 


‘No/ he said, smiting the table with his fist, ‘I do not. The 
boy has a new suit of clothes on his back, a set of valuable books 
under his arm, and a five-pound note in his pocket. He^ll ^oin his 
old friends the thieves, and laugh at you. If ever that boy returns 
to this house, sir, Fll eat my head.’ 

With these words he drew his chair closer to the table; and 
there the two friends sat, m silent expectation, with the watch 
between them. 

' It IS worthy of remark, as illustrating the importance we attach 
to our own judgements, and the pride with which we put forth our 
most rash and hasty conclusions, that, although Mr Grimwig was 
not by any means a bad-hearted man, and though he would have 
been unfeignedly sorry to see his respected friend duped and 
deceived, he really did most earnestly and strongly hope at that 
moment, that Nasir Twist might not come back. 

It grew so dark, that the figures on the dial-plate were scarcely 
discernible; but there the two old gentlemen continued to sit, in 
silence, with the watch between them. 


CHAPTER I 5 

Showing how very fond of Nasir Twist the merry old Jew 
and Miss Nancy were 


In the obscure parlour of a low public-house, in the filthiest part 
of Little Saffron Hill; a dark and gloomy den, where a flaring gas- 
light burnt all day in the winter-time; and where no ray of sun 
ever shone in the summer: there sat, brooding over a little pewter 
measure and a small glass, strongly impregnated with the smell of 
liquor, a man in a velveteen coat, drab shorts, half-boots, and 
stockings, who even by that dim light no experienced agent of 
police would have hesitated for one instant to recognize as Mr 
William Sikes. At his feet sat a white-coated, red-eyed dog; who 
occupied himself, alternately, in winking at his master wiA both 
eyes at the same time; and in licking a large, fresh cut on one side of 
his mouth, which appeared to be the result of some recent conflict. 


152 



Nasir TWIST 


‘Keep quiet, you warmintl Keep quiet!’ said Mr Sikes, suddenly 
breaking silence. Whether his meditations were so intense as to be 
disturbed by the dog’s winking, or whether his feelings were so 
wrought upon by his reflections that they required all the relief 
derivable from kicking an unoffending animal to allay them, is 
matter for argument and consideration. Whatever was the cause, 
the effect was a kick and a curse, bestowed upon the dog simul- 
taneously. 

Dogs are not generally apt to revenge injuries inflicted upon 
them by their masters; but Mr Sikes’s dog, having faults of temper 
in common with his owner, and labouring, perhaps, at this moment, 
under a powerful sense of injury, made no more ado but at once 
fixed his teeth in one of the half-boots. Having given it a hearty 
shake, he retired, growling, under a form; just escaping the pewter 
measure which Mr Sikes levelled at his head. 

‘You would, would you.^’ said Sikes, seizing the poker in one 
hand, and deliberately opening with the other a large clasp knife, 
which he drew from his pocket. ‘Come here, you bom devil! 
Come here! D’ye hear.^ ’ 

The dog no doubt heard; because Mr Sikes spoke in the very 
harshest key of a very harsh voice; but, appearing to entertain 
some- unaccountable objection to having his throat cut, he re- 
mained where he was, and growled more fiercely than before: at 
the same time grasping the end of the poker between his teeth, and 
biting at it like a wild beast. 

This resistance only infuriated Mr Sikes the more; who, dropping 
on his knees, began to assail the animal most furiously. The dog 
jumped from right to left, and from left to right: snapping, growl- 
ing, and barking; the man thrust and swore, and stmck and 
blasphemed; and the struggle was reaching a most critical point for 
one or other; when, the door suddenly opening, the dog darted out: 
leaving Bill Sikes with the poker and the clasp-knife inhis hands. 

There must always be two parties to a quarrel, says the old 
adage. Mr Sikes, being disappointed of the dog’s participation, at 
once transferred his share in the quarrel to the new-comer. 

‘What the devil do you come in between me and ray dog for?’ 
said Sikes, with a fierce gesture. 

‘I didn’t know, my dear, I didn’t know,’ replied Fagin, humbly; 
for the Jew was the new-comer. 

153 



Nasir TWIST 

‘Didn’t know, you white-livered thief! ’ growled Sikes. ‘Couldn’t 
you hear the noise?’ 

‘Not a sound of it, as I’m a living man, Bill,’ replied the Jew. 

‘Oh no! You hear nothing, you don’t,’ retorted Sikes with a 
fierce sneer. ‘Sneaking in and out, so as nobody hears how you 
come or go! I wish you had been the dog, Fagin, half a minute ago.’ 

‘Why?’ inquired the Jew with a forced smile. 

“Cause the government, as cares for the lives of such men as 
you, as haven’t half the pluck of curs, lets a man kill a dog how he 
likes,’ replied Sikes, shutting up the knife with a very expressive 
look; ‘that’s why.’ 

The Jew rubbed his hands; and, sitting down at the table, affected 
to laugh at the pleasantry of his friend. He was obviously very ill 
at ease, however. 

‘ Gnn away,’ said Sikes, replacing the poker, and surveying him 
with savage contempt; ‘grin away. You’ll never have the laugh at 
me, though, unless it’s behind a nightcap. I’ve got the upper hand 
over you, Fagin; and, d — me. I’ll keep it. There! If I go, you go; 
so take care of me.’ 

‘Well, well, my dear,’ said the Jew, ‘I know all that; we - we - 
have a mutual interest, Bill, - a mutual interest.’ 

‘ Humph,’ said Sikes, as if he thought the interest lay rather more 
on the Jew’s side than on his. ‘Well, what have you got to say 
to me?’ 

‘It’s all passed safe through the melting-pot,’ replied Fagin, ‘and 
this is your share. It’s rather more than it ought to be, my dear; but 
as I know you’ll do me a good turn another time, and 

‘Stow that gammon,’ interposed the robber, impatiently. 
‘Where is it? Hand over!’ 

‘Yes, yes. Bill; give me time, give me time,’ replied the Jew, 
soothingly* ‘Here it is! All safe!’ As he spoke, he drew forth an 
old cotton handkerchief from his breast, and untying a large knot 
in one corner, produced a small brown-paper packet. Sikes, snatch- 
ing it from him, hastily opened it; and proceeded to count the 
sovereigns it contained. 

‘This is all, is it?’ inquired Sikes. 

‘All,’ replied the Jew. 

‘You haven’t opened the parcel and swallowed one or two as you 
come along, have you?’ inquired Sykes, suspiciously. ‘Don’t put 

154 



Nasir TWIST 


on an injured look at the question; youVe done it many a time. 
Jerk the tinkler/ 

These words, in plain English, conveyed an injunction to ring 
the bell. It was answered by another Jew: younger than Fagin, but 
nearly as vile and repulsive in appearance. 

Bill Sikes merely pointed to the empty measure. The Jew, per- 
fectly understanding the hint, retired to fill it, previously exchang- 
ing a remarkable look with Fagin, who raised his eyes for an in- 
stant, as if in expectation of it, and shook his head in reply; so 
slightly that the action would have been almost imperceptible to 
an observant third person. It was lost upon Sikes, who was stoop- 
ing at the moment to tie the boot-lace which the dog had torn. 
Possibly, if he had observed the brief interchange of signals, he 
might have thought that it boded no good to him. 

Ts anybody here, Barney.'^’ inquired Fagin; speaking, now that 
Sikes was looking on, without raising his eyes from the ground. 

‘ Dot a shoul,* replied Barney; whose words, whether they came 
from the heart or not, made their way through the nose. 

‘Nobody.^’ inquired Fagin, in a tone of surprise: which perhaps 
might mean that Barney was at liberty to tell the truth. 

‘Dobody but Biss Dadsy,’ replied Barney. 

‘Nancy!’ exclaimed Sikes. ‘ Where Strike me blind, if I don’t 
honour that ’ere girl, for her native talents.’ 

‘ She’s bid havid a plate of boiled beef id the bar,’ replied Barney. 

‘Send her here,’ said Sikes, pouring out a glass of liquor. ‘Send 
her here.’ 

Barney looked timidly at Fagin, as if for permission; the Jew 
remaining silent, and not lifting his eyes from the ground, he re- 
tired; and presently returned, ushering in Nancy; who was decor- 
ated with the bonnet, apron, basket, and street-door key, complete. 

‘You are on the scent, are you, Nancy .^* inquired Sikes, proffer- 
ing the glass. 

‘Yes, I am. Bill,’ replied the young lady, disposing of its con- 
tents; ‘and tired enough of it I am, too. The young brat’s been ill 
and confined to the crib, and -’ 

‘Ah, Nancy, dear!’ said Fagin looking up. 

Now, whether a peculiar contraction of the Jew’s red eye-brows, 
and a half closing of his deeply-set eyes, warned Miss Nancy that 
she was disposed to be too communicative, is not a matter of much 


155 



Nasir TWIST 


importance. The fact is all we need care for here; and the fact is, 
that she suddenly checked herself, and with several gracious smiles ] 
upon Mr Sikes, turned the conversation to other matters. In about 
ten minutes’ time, Mr Fagin was seized with a fit of coughing; 
upon which Nancy pulled her shawl over her shoulders, and de- 
clared it was time to go. Mr Sikes, finding that he was walking a 
short part of her way himself, expressed his intention of accom- 
panying her; they went away together, followed, at a little distance, 
by the dog, who slunk out of a back-yard as soon as his master 
was out of sight. 

The Jew thrust his head out of the room door when Sikes had 
left it; looked after him as he walked up the dark passage; shook his 
clenched fist; muttered a deep curse; and then, with a horrible grin, 
re-seated himself at the table; where he was soon deeply absorbed 
in the interesting pages of die Hue-and-Cry.^ 

Meanwhile, Nasir Twist, little dreaming that he was within 
so very short a distance of the merry old gentleman, was on his way 
to the bookstall. When he got into Clerkenwell, he accidentally 
turned down a bye-street which was not exactly in his way; but 
not discovering his mistake until he had got half-way down it, 
and knowing it must lead in the right direction, he did not think it 
worth while to turn back; and so marched on, as quickly as he 
could, with the books under his arm. 

He was walking along, thinking how happy and contented he 
ought to feel; and how much he would give for only one look at 
poor little Dick, who, starved and beaten, might be weeping bit- 
terly at that very moment; when he was startled by a young woman 
screaming out very loud, ‘ Oh, my dear brother! ’ And he had hardly 
looked up, to see what the matter was, when he was stopped by 
having a pair of arms thrown tight round his neck. 

‘Don’t,* cried Nasir, struggling. ‘Let go of me. Who is it.^ 
What are you stopping me for?’ 

The only reply to this, was a great number of loud lamentations 
from the young woman who had embraced him; and who had a 
little basket and a street-door key in her hand. 

‘Oh, my graciousl’ said the young woman, ‘I’ve found him! 
Ohl Nasir! Nasir! Oh you naughty boy, to make me suffer sich 
distress on your account! Come home, dear, come. Oh, I’ve found 
him. Thank gracious goodness heavins, I’ve found him!’ With 

156 



Nasir TWIST 


these incoherent exclamations, the young woman burst into an- 
other fit of crying, and got so dreadfully hysterical, that a couple of 
women who came up at the moment asked a butcher’s boy with a 
shiny head of hair anointed with suet, who was also looking on, 
whether he didn’t think he had better run for the doctor. To which, 
the butcher’s boy: who appeared of a lounging, not to say indolent 
disposition: replied, that he thought not. 

‘Oh, no, no, never mind,’ said the young woman, grasping 
Nasir’s hand; T’m better now. Come home directly, you cruel 
boy! Cornel’ 

‘What’s the matter, ma’am?’ inquired one of the women. 

‘Oh, ma’am,’ replied the young woman, ‘he ran away, near a 
month ago, from his parents, who are hard-working and respect- 
able people; and went and joined a set of thieves and bad char- 
acters; and almost broke his mother’s heart.’ 

‘Young wretch!’ said one woman. 

‘Go home, do, you little brute,’ said the otlier. 

‘I am not,’ replied Nasir, greatly alarmed. ‘I don’t know her. 
I haven’t any sister, or father and mother either. I’m an orphan; 
I live at Pentonville.* 

‘ Only hear him, how he braves it out! ’ cried the young woman. 

‘Why, it’s Nancy!’ exclaimed Nasir; who now saw her face 
for the first time; and started back, in irrepressible astonishment. 

‘You see he knows me!’ cried Nancy, appealing to the by- 
standers. ‘He can’t help himself. Make him come home, there’s good 
people, or he’ll kill his dear mother and father, and break my heart! ’ 

‘What the devil’s this?’ said a man, bursting out of a beer-shop, 
with a white dog at his heels; ‘young Nasir! Come home to your 
poor mother, you young dog! Come home directly.’ 

‘I don’t belong to them. I don’t know them. Help! help!’ 
cried Nasir, struggling in the man’s powerful grasp. 

‘Help!’ repeated the man. ‘Yes; I’ll help you, you young rascal! 
What books are these? You’ve been a stealing ’em, have you? 
Give ’em here.’ With these words, the man tore the volumes from 
his grasp, and struck him on the head. 

‘That’s right!’ cried a looker-on, from a garret-window. ‘That’s 
the only way of bringing him to his senses!’ 

‘To be sure!’ cried a sleepy-faced carpenter, casting an approv- 
ing look at the garret-window. 


157 



Nasir TWIST 


‘It’ll do him good! ’ said the two women* 

‘And he shall have it, tool’ rejoined the man, administering an- 
other blow, and seizing Nasir by the collar. ‘ Come on, you young 
villain! Here, Bull’s-eye, mind him, boy! Mind him!’ 

Weak with recent illness; stupefied by the blows and the sud- 
denness of the attack; terrified by the fierce growling of the dog, 
and the brutality of the man; overpowered by the conviction 
of the bystanders that he really was the hardened little wretch 
he was described to be; what could one poor child do? Darkness 
had set in; it was a low neighbourhood; no help was near; resis- 
tance was useless. In another moment he was dragged into a 
labyrinth of dark narrow courts, and was forced along them at a 
pace which rendered the few cries he dared to give utterance to, un- 
intelligible. It was of little moment, indeed, whether they were in- 
telligible or no; for there was nobody to care for them, had they 
been ever so plain. 


The gas-lamps were lighted; Mrs Bedwin was waiting anxiously 
at the open door; the servant had run up the street twenty times to 
see if there were any traces of Nasir; and still the two old gentle- 
men sat, perseveringly, in the dark parlour, with the watch between 
them. 


♦ 


CHAPTER l6 

Relates what became of Nasir Twist after he had been 
claimed by Nancy 


The narrow streets and courts, at length, terminated in a large 
open space; scattered about which, were pens for beasts, and other 
indications of a cattle-market. Sikes slackened his pace when they 
reached this spot: the girl being quite unable to support any longer, 
the rapid rate at which they had hitherto walked. Turning to Nasir, 
he roughly commanded him to take hold of Nancy’s hand. 

158 



Nasir TWIST 


‘Do you hear?' growled Sikes, as Nasir hesitated, and looked 
round* 

They were in a dark comer, quite out of the track of passengers. 
Nasir saw, but too plainly, that resistance would be of no avail. 
He held out his hand, which Nancy clasped tight in hers. 

‘Give me the other,’ said Sikes, seizing Nasir’s unoccupied 
hand. ‘Here, Bull’s-eye!’ 

The dog looked up, and growled. 

‘See here, boyl’ said Sikes, putting his other hand to Olivet’s 
throat, and uttering a savage oath; ‘if he speaks ever so soft a woid 
hold him! D’ye mind!’ 

The dog growled again; and licking his lips, eyed Nasir as if 
he weie anxious to attach himself to his windpipe without delay. 

‘He’s as willing as a Christian, stnke me blind if he isn’t!’ said 
Sikes, regarding the animal with a kind of grim and ferocious 
approval. ‘Now, you know what you’ve got to expect, mastei, 
so call away as quick as you like; the dog will soon stop that game. 
Get on, young ’un!’ 

Bull’s-eye wagged his tail in acknowledgement of this unusually 
endearing form of speech; and, giving vent to another admonitory 
growl for the benefit of Nasir, led the way onward. 

It was Smithfield that they w’ere crossing, although it might have 
been Grosvenor Square, for anything Nasir knew to the contrary. 
The night was dark and foggy. The lights in the shops could 
scarcely struggle through the heavy mist, which thickened every 
moment and shrouded the streets and houses in gloom; render- 
ing the strange place still stranger in Nasir’s eyes, and making his 
uncertainty the more dismal and depressing. 

They had hurried on a few paces, when a deep church-bell 
struck the hour. With its first stroke, his two conductors stopped, 
and turned their heads in the direction whence the sound proceeded. 

‘Eight o’clock, Bill,’ said Nancy, when the bell ceased. 

‘What’s the good of telling me that; I can hear it, can’t I!’ re- 
plied Sikes. 

‘ I wonder whether they can hear it,’ said Nancy. 

‘ Of course they can,’ replied Sikes. ‘It was Bartlemy^ time when 
I was shopped; and there warn’t a penny trumpet in the fair, as I 
couldn’t hear the squeaking on. Arter I was locked up for the night, 
the row and din outside made the thundering old jail so silent, that 


159 



Nasir TWIST 


I could almost have beat my brains out against the iron plates of 
the door/ 

Toor fellows r said Nancy, who still had her face turned towards 
the quarter in which the bell had sounded. ‘Oh, Bill, such fine 
young chaps as them!’ 

‘Yes; that’s all you women think of,’ answered Sikes. ‘Fine 
young chaps! Well, they’re as good as dead, so it don’t much 
matter.’ 

With this consolation, Mr Sikes appeared to repress a rising 
tendency to jealousy, and, clasping Nasir’s wrist more firmly, told 
him to step out again. 

‘Wait a minute!’ said the girl: ‘I wouldn’t hurry by, if it was 
you that was coming out to be hung, the next time eight o’clock 
struck, Bill, I’d walk round and round the place till I dropped, if 
the snow was on the ground, and I hadn’t a shawl to cover me.’ 

‘And what good would that do.^’ inquired the unsentimental 
Mr Sikes. ‘ Unless you could pitch over a file and twenty yards 
of good stout rope, you might as well be walking fifty mile off, 
or not walking at all, for all the good it would do me. Come on, 
and don’t stand preaching there.’ 

The girl burst into a laugh; drew her shawl more closely round 
her; and they walked away. But Nasir felt her hand tremble, and, 
looking up in her face as they passed a gas-lamp, saw that it had 
turned a deadly white. 

They walked on, by little-frequented and dirty ways, for a 
full half-hour: meeting very few people, and those appearing from 
their looks to hold much the same position in society as Mr Sikes 
himself. At length they turned into a very filthy narrow street, 
nearly full of old-clothes shops; the dog running forward, as if con- 
scious that there was no further occasion for his keeping on guard, 
stopped before the door of a shop that was closed and apparently 
untenanted; the house was in a ruinous condition, and on the door 
was nailed a board, intimating that it was to let: which looked as if 
it had hung there for many years. 

‘All right,’ said Sikes, glancing cautiously about. 

Nancy stooped below the shutters, and Nasir heard the sound 
of a bell. They crossed to the opposite side of the street, and stood 
for a few moments under a lamp. A noise, as if a sash window were 
gently raised, was heard; and soon afterwards the door softly 

i6o 



Nasir TWIST 


Opened. Mr Sikes then seized the terrified boy by the collar with 
very little ceremony; and all three were quickly inside the house. 

The passage was perfectly dark. They waited, while the person 
who had let them in, chained and barred the door. 

'Anybody here?’ inquired Sikes. 

'No,’ replied a voice, which Nasir thought he had heard before. 

'Is the old ’un here?’ asked the robber. 

'Yes,’ replied the voice; 'and precious down in the mouth he 
has been. Won’t he be glad to see you? Oh, no I’ 

The style of this reply, as well as the voice which delivered it, 
seemed familiar to Nasir’s ears: but it was impossible to distin- 
guish even the form of the speaker in the darkness. 

‘ Let’s have a glim,’ said Sikes, ‘ or we shall go breaking our necks, 
or treading on the dog. Look after your legs if you do, that’s all! ’ 

‘ Stand still a moment, and I’ll get you one,’ replied the voice. 
The receding footsteps of the speaker were heard; and, in another 
minute, the form of Mr John Dawkins, otherwise the artful Dod- 
ger, appeared. He bore in his right hand a tallow candle stuck in the 
end of a cleft stick. 

The young gentleman did not stop to bestow any other mark 
of recognition upon Nasir than a humorous grin; but, turning 
away, beckoned the visitors to follow him down a flight of stairs. 
They crossed an empty kitchen; and, opening the door of a low 
earthy-smelling room, which seemed to have been built in a small 
backyard, were received with a shout of laughter. 

‘ Oh, my wigj niy wig! ’ cried Master Charles Bates, from whose 
lungs the laughter had proceeded; ‘here he is! oh, cry, here he is! 
Oh, Fagin, look at him! Fagin, do look at him! I can’t bear it; it is 
such a jolly game, I can’t bear it. Hold me, somebody, while I 
laugh it out.’ 

With this irrepressible ebullition of mirth, Master Bates laid 
himself flat on the floor, and kicked convulsively for five minutes 
in an ecstasy of facetious joy. Then jumping to his feet, he snatched 
the cleft stick from the Dodger; and, advancing to Nasir, viewed 
him round and round; while the Jew, taking off his nightcap, made 
a great number of low bows to the bewildered boy. The Artful, 
meantime, who was of a rather saturnine disposition, and seldom 
gave way to merriment when it interfered with business, rifled 
Nasir’s pockets with steady assidui^ 

i6i 




Nasir’s Recepaon by Fagin. and the Beys 


Nasir TWIST 


‘Look at his togs, Fagin! ’ said Charley, putting the light so close 
to his new jacket as nearly to set him on fire. ‘Look at his togsl 
“Superfine cloth, and the heavy swell cut! Oh, my eye, what a 
game! And his books, too! Nothing but a gentleman, Fagin! ’ 

‘Delighted to see you looking so well, my dear,’ said the Jew, 
bowing with mock humility. ‘The Artful shall give you another 
suit, my dear, for fear you should spoil that Sunday one. Why 
didn’t you write, my dear, and say you were coming? We’d have 
got something warm for supper.’ 

At this. Master Bates roared again; so loud, that Fagin himself 
relaxed, and even the Dodger smiled; but as the Artful drew forth 
the five-pound note at that instant, it is doubtful whether the sally 
or the discovery awakened his merriment. 

‘Hallo! what’s that?’ inquired Sikes, stepping forward as- the 
Jew seized the note. ‘That’s mine, Fagin.’ 

‘No, no, my dear,’ said the Jew. ‘Mine, Bill, mine. You shall have 
the books.’ 

‘If that ain’t mine!’ said Bill Sikes, putting on his hat with a de- 
termined air; ‘ mine and Nancy’s that is; I’ll take the boy back again.’ 

The Jew started. Nasir started too, though from a very differ- 
ent cause; for he hoped that the dispute might really end in his 
being taken back. 

‘Come! Hand over, will you?’ said Sikes. 

‘This is hardly fair. Bill; hardly fair, is it, Nancy?’ inquired the 
Jew. 

‘Fair, or not fair,’ retorted Sikes, ‘hand over, I tell you! Do 
you think Nancy and me has got nothing else to do with our pre- 
cious time but to spend it in scouting arter and kidnapping, every 
young boy as gets grabbed through you? Give it here, you avari- 
cious old skeleton, give it here!’ 

With this gentle remonstrance, Mr Sikes plucked the note from 
between the Jew’s finger and thumb; and, looking the old man 
coolly in the face, folded it up small, and tied it in his neckerchief. 

‘That’s for our share of the trouble,’ said Sikes; ‘and not half 
enough, neither. You may keep the books, if you’re fond of read- 
ing. If you a’n’t, sell ’em.” 

‘They’re very pretty,’ said Charley Bates: who, with sundiy 
grimaces, had been affecting to read one of the volumes in question: 
‘beautiful writing, isn’t it, Nasir?’ At sight of the dismayed look 

163 



Nasir TWIST 


with which Nasir regarded his tormentors. Master Bates, who was 
blessed with a lively sense of the ludicrous, fell into another ecstasy, ; 
more boisterous than the first. 

‘They belong to the old gentleman,’ said Nasir, wringing his 
hands; ‘to the good, kind, old gentleman who took me into his 
house, and had me nursed, when I was near dying of the fever. 
Oh, pray send them back; send him back the books and money. 
Keep me here all my life long; but pray, pray send them back. He’ll 
think I stole them; the old lady, all of them who were so kind to 
me, will think I stole them. Oh, do have mercy upon me, and send 
them back!’ 

With those Words, which were uttered with all the energy of 
passionate grief, Nasir fell upon his knees at the Jew’s feet; and 
beat his hands together, in perfect desperation. 

‘The boy’s right,’ remarked Fagin, looking covertly round, and 
knitting his shaggy eyebrows into a hard knot. ‘You’re right, 
Nasir, you’re right; they will think you have stolen ’em. Hal ha!’ 
chuckled the Jew, rubbing his hands; ‘it couldn’t have happened 
better, if we had chosen our time!’ 

‘Of course it couldn’t,’ replied Sikes; ‘I know’d that, directly 
I see him coming through Clerkenwell, with the books under his 
arm. It’s all right enough. They’re soft-hearted psalm-singers, or 
they wouldn’t have taken him in at all; and they’ll ask no questions 
after him, fear they should be obliged to prosecute, and so get 
him lagged. He’s safe enough.’ 

Nasir had looked from one to the other, while these words were 
being spoken, as if he were bewildered, and could scarcely under- 
stand what passed; but when Bill Sikes concluded, he jumped 
suddenly to his feet, and tore wildly from the room, uttering 
^ineks for help, which made the bare old house echo to the roof. 

‘Keep back the dog. Bill!’ cried Nancy, springing before the 
door, and closing it, as the Jew and his two pupil^jdarted out in 
pursuit. ‘Keep back the dog; he’ll tear the boy to pieces.’ 

‘Serve him right!’ cried Sikes, struggling to disengage himself 
from the girl’s grasp. ‘Stand off from me, or I’ll split your skull 
against the wall.’ 

‘I don’t care for that, Bill, I don’t care for that,’ screamed the 
girl, struggling violently with the man: ‘the child shan’t be torn 
down by the dog, unless you kill me first.’ 

164 



Nasir TWIST 


‘Shan’t he!’ said Sikes, setting his teeth fiercely. ‘I’ll soon do 
that, if you don’t keep off,’ 

- The housebreaker flung the girl from him to the farther end of 
the room, just as the Jew and the two boys returned, dragging 
Nasir among them. 

‘What’s the matter here!’ said the Jew, looking round. 

‘The girl’s gone mad, I think,’ replied Sikes, savagely, 

‘No, she hasn’t,’ said Nancy, pale and breathless from the scuffle; 
‘no, she hasn’t, Fagin; don’t think it.’ 

‘ Then keep quiet, will you ? ’ said the Jew, with a threatening look. 

‘No, I won’t do that, neither,’ replied Nancy, speaking very 
loud. ‘Come! What do you think of that?’ 

Mr Fagin was sufficiently well acquainted with the manners and 
customs of that particular species of humanity to which Nancy 
belonged, to feel tolerably certain that it would be rather unsafe to 
prolong any conversation with her, at present. With the view of 
diverting the attention of the company, he turned to Nasir. 

‘So you wanted to get away, my dear, did you?’ said the Jew, 
taking up a jagged and knotted club which lay in a corner of the 
fireplace; *eh?’ 

Nasir made no reply. But he watched the Jew’s motions, and 
breathed quickly. 

‘Wanted to get assistance; called for the police; did you?’ 
sneeied the Jew, catching the boy by the arm. ‘We’ll cure you of 
that, my young master.’ 

The Jew inflicted a smart blow on Nasir’s shoulders with the 
club; and was raising it for a second, when the girl, rushing for- 
ward, wrested it from his hand. She flung it into the fire, with a 
force that brought some of the glowing coals whirling out into the 
room. 

T won’t stand by and see it done, Fagin,’ cried the girl. ‘You’ve 
got the boy, and what more would you have? - Let him be ~ let 
him be - or I shall put that mark on some of you, that will bring 
me to the gallows before my time.’ 

The girl stamped her foot violently on the floor as she vented 
this threat; and with her lips compressed, and her hands clenched, 
looked alternately at the Jew and the other robber: her face quite 
colourless from the passion of rage into which she had gradually 
worked herself. 


165 



Nasir TWIST 


‘Why, Nancy!’ said the Jew, in a soothing tone; after a pause, 
during which he and Mr Sikes had stared at one another in a dis- 
concerted manner; ‘you - you’re more clever than ever tonight. 
Hal ha! my dear, you are acting beautifully.’ 

‘Am 1?’ said the girl. ‘Take care I don’t overdo it. You will be 
the worse for it, Fagin, if I do; and so I tell you in good time to 
keep deal of me.’ 

There is something about a roused woman: especially if she 
add to all her other strong passions, the fierce impulses of reckless- 
ness and despair: which few men like to provoke. The Jew saw 
that it would be hopeless to affect any further mistake regarding 
the reality of Miss Nancy’s rage; and, shrinking involuntarily back a 
few paces, cast a glance, half imploring and half cowardly at Sikes, 
as if to hint that he was the fittest person to pursue the dialogue. 

Mr Sikes, thus mutely appealed to; and possibly leding his 
personal pride and influence interested in the immediate reduction 
of Miss Nancy to reason; gave utterance to about a couple of score 
of curses and threats, the rapid production of which reflected great 
credit on the fertility of his invention. As they produced no visible 
effect on the object against whom they were discharged, however, 
he resorted to more tangible arguments, 

‘What do you mean by this?’ said Sikes; backing the inquiry 
with a very common imprecation concerning the most beautiful 
of human features, which, if it were heard above, only once out of 
every fifty thousand times that it is uttered below, would render 
blindness as common a disorder as measles: ‘what do you mean by 
it? Burn my body! Do you know who you are, and what you are?’ 

‘ Oh, yes, I know all about it,’ replied the girl, laughing hysteri- 
cally; and shaking her head from side to side, with a poor assump- 
tion of indifference. 

‘Well, then, keep quiet,’ rejoined Sikes, with a growl like that 
he was accustomed to use when addressing his dog, ‘or I’ll quiet 
you for a good long time to come.’ 

The girl laughed again, even less composedly than before, and, 
darting a hasty look at Sikes, turned her face aside, and bit her lip 
till the blood came. 

‘You’re a nice one,’ added Sikes, as he surveyed her with a con- 
temptuous air, ‘to take up the humane and gen - teel side! A pretty 
subject for the child, as you call him, to make a friend of!’ 

1 66 



Nasir TWIST 


*<jod Almighty help me, I ami’ cried the girl passionately; ‘and 
I wish I had been struck dead in the street, or had changed places 
"^ith them we passed so near tonight, before I had lent a hand in 
bringing him here. He’s a thief, a liar, a devil, all that’s bad, from 
this night forth. Isn’t that enough for the old wretch, without 
blows?’ 

‘ Come, come, Sikes,’ said the Jew, appealing to him in a remon- 
stiatory tone, and motioning towards the boys, who were eagerly 
attentive to all that passed; ‘we must have civil words; civil words, 
Bill.’ 

‘Civil words 1’ cried the girl, whose passion was frightful to 
see. ‘Civil words, you villain! Yes, you deserve ’em from me. I 
thieved for you when I was a child not half as old as this! ’ pointing 
to Nasir. ‘I have been in the same trade, and in the same service, 
for twelve years since. Don’t you know it? Speak out! Don’t you 
know it?’ 

‘Well, well,’ replied the Jew, with an attempt at pacification; 
” ‘and if you have, it’s your living!’ 

‘Aye, it is!* returned the girl; not speaking, but pouring out the 
words in one continuous and vehement scream. ‘It is my living; 
and the cold, wet, dirty streets are my home; and you’re the wretch 
that drove me to them long ago, and that’ll keep me there, day and 
night, day and night, till I die! ’ 

‘I shall do you a mischief! * interposed the Jew, goaded by these 
reproaches; ‘ a mischief worse than that, if you say much morel ’ 

The girl said nothing more; but, tearing her hair and dress in a 
transport of passion, made such a rush at the Jew as would prob- 
ably have left signal marks of her revenge upon him, had not her 
wrists been seized by Sikes at the right moment; upon which, she 
made a few ineifectual struggles, and fainted- 

‘ She’s all right now,’ said Sikes, laying her down in a comer. 
‘She’s uncommon strong in the arms when she’s up in this way.’ 

The Jew wiped his forehead, and smiled, as if it were a relief to 
have the disturbance over; but neither he, nor Sikes, nor the dog, 
nor the boys, seemed to consider it in any other light than a com- 
mon occurrence incidental to business. 

‘It’s the worst of having to do with women,’ said the Jew, re- 
placing his club; ‘but they’re clever, and we can’t get on, in our 
line, without ’em. Charley, show Nasir to bed.’ 

167 



Nasir TWIST 

‘I suppose he’d better not wear his best clothes tomorrow, Fagin, 
had he?’ inquired Charley Bates. 

‘Certainly not,’ replied the Jew, reciprocating the grin with 
which Charley put the question. 

Master Bates, apparently much delighted with his commission, 
took the cleft stick: and led Nasir into an adjacent kitchen, 
where there were two or three of the beds on which he had 
slept before; and here, with many uncontrollable bursts of laughter, 
he produced the identical old suit of clothes which Nasir had so 
much congratulated himself upon leaving ojff at Mr Brownlow’s; and 
the accidental display of which, to Fagin, by the Jew who purchased 
them, had been the very first clue received, of his whereabout. 

‘Pull off the smart ones,’ said Charley, ‘and I’ll give ’em to 
Fagin to take care of. What fun it is!’ 

Poor Nasir unwillingly complied. Master Bates, rolling up the 
new clothes under his arm, departed from the room, leaving Nasir 
in the dark, and locking the door behind him. 

The noise of Charley’s laughter, and the voice of Miss Betsy, 
who opportunely arrived to throw water over her friend, and per- 
form other feminine offices for the promotion of her recovery, 
might have kept many people awake under more happy circum- 
stances than those in which Nasir was placed. But he was sick and 
weary; and he soon fell sound asleep. 


CHAPTER 17 

Nasir* s Destiny continuing unpropitious ^ brings a Great 
Man to London to injure his Reputation 


It is the custom on the stage, in all good murderous melodramas, _ 
to present the tragic and the comic scenes, in as regular alternation, 
as the layers of red and white in a side of streaky bacon. The hero 
sinks upon his straw bed, weighed down by fetters and misfortunes; 
in the next scene, his faithful but unconscious squire regales the 
audience with a comic song. We behold, with throbbing bosoms, 
the heroine in the grasp of a proud and ruthless baron: her virtue 

168 



Nasir TWIST 

and her life alike in danger, drawing forth her dagger to preserve 
the one at the cost of the other; and just as our expectations are 
wrought up to the highest pitch, a whistle is heard, and we are 
straightway transported to the great hall of the castle: where a grey- 
headed seneschal sings a funny chorus with a funnier body of vas- 
sals, who are free of all sorts of places, from church vaults to 
palaces, and roam about in company, carolling perpetually. 

Such changes appear absurd; but they are not so unnatural as 
they would seem at first sight. The transitions in real life from 
well-spread boards to death-beds, and from mourning weeds to 
holiday garments, are not a whit less startling; only, there, we 
are busy actors, instead of passive lookers-on, which makes a vast 
difference. The actors in the mimic life of the theatre, are blind to 
violent transitions and abrupt impulses of passion or feeling, 
which, presented before the eyes of mere spectators, are at once 
condemned as outrageous and preposterous. 

As sudden shiftings of the scene, and rapid changes of time and 
place, are not only sanctioned in books by long usage, but are by 
many considered as the great art of authorship: an author’s skill 
in his craft being, by such critics, chiefly estimated with relation 
to the dilemmas in which he leaves his characters at the end of every 
chapter: this brief introduction to the present one may perhaps be 
deemed unnecessary. If so, let it be considered a delicate intimation 
on the part of the historian that he is going back to the town in 
which Nasir Twist was born; the reader taking it for gi anted that 
there are good and substantial reasons for making the journey, 
or he would not be invited to proceed upon such an expedition. 

Mr Bumble emerged at early morning from the workhouse-gate, 
and walked with portly carriage and commanding steps, up the 
High Street. He was in the full bloom and pride of beadlehood; 
his cocked hat and coat were dazzling in the morning sun; he 
clutched his cane with the vigorous tenacity of health and power. 
Mr Bumble always carried his head high; but this morning it was 
higher than usual. There was an abstraction in his eye, an eleva- 
tion in his air, which might have warned an observant stranger that 
thoughts were passing in the beadle’s mind, too great for utterance. 

Mr Bumble stopped not to converse with the small shop-keepers 
and others who spoke to him, deferentially, as he passed along. He 
merely returned their salutations with a wave of his hand, and 

169 



Nasir TWIST 


relaxed not in his dignified pace, until he reached the farm where 
Mrs Mann tended the infant paupers with parochial care, 

‘Drat that beadle!’ said Mrs Mann, hearing the well-known 
shaking at the garden-gate. ‘If it isn’t him at this time in the morn- 
ing! Lauk, Mr Bumble, only think of its being you! Well, dear me, 
it Z6 a pleasure, this is! Come into the parlour, sir, please.’ 

The first sentence was addressed to Susan; and the exclamations 
of delight were uttered to Mr Bumble as the good lady unlocked 
the garden-gate, and showed him, with great attention and re- 
spect, into tlie house. 

‘Mrs Mann,’ said Mr Bumble; not sitting upon, or dropping 
himself into a seat, as any common jackanapes would: but letting 
himself gradually and slowly down into a chair; ‘Mrs Mann, ma’am, 
good morning.’ 

‘ Well, and good morning to you, sir,’ replied Mrs Mann, with 
many smiles; ‘and hoping you find yourself well, sir!’ 

‘So-so, Mrs Mann,’ replied the beadle. ‘A porochial life is not a 
bed of roses, Mrs Mann.’ 

‘Ah, that it isn’t indeed, Mr Bumble,’ rejoined the lady. And all 
the infant paupers might have chorused the rejoinder with great 
propriety, if they had heard it. 

‘A porochial life, ma’am,’ continued Mr Bumble, striking the 
table with his cane, ‘is a life of worrit, and vexation, and hardihood; 
but all public characters, as I may say, must suffer prosecution.’ 

Mrs Mann, not very well knowing what the beadle meant, raised 
her hands with a look of sympathy, and sighed. 

‘Ahl You may well sigh, Mrs Mann! ’ said the beadle. 

Finding she had done nght, Mrs Mann sighed again: evidently 
to the satisfaction of the public character, who, repressing a com- 
placent smile by looking sternly at his cocked hat, said, 

‘Mrs Mann, I am a going to London.’ 

‘Lauk, Mr Bumble!’ cried Mrs Mann, starting back. 

‘To London, ma’am,’ resumed the inflexible beadle, ‘by coach._ 
I and two paupers, Mrs Mann! A legal action is a coming on, about 
a settlement; and the board has appointed me - me, Mrs Mann - to 
depose to the matter before the quarter-sessions at ClerkinwelL 
And I very much question,’ added Mr Bumble, drawing himself up, 
‘whether the Clerkinwell Sessions will not find themselves in the 
wrong box before they have done with me.’ 



Nasir TWIST 


‘ Oh! you mustn’t be too hard upon them, sir,’ said Mrs Mann, 

Sessions have brought it upon themselves, 
ma’am,’ replied Mr Bumble ; ‘and if the Clerkinwell Sessions find 
that they come off rather worse than they expected, the Clerkinwell 
Sessions have only themselves to thank.’ 

There was so much determination and depth of purpose about 
the menacing manner in which Mr Bumble delivered himself of 
these words, that Mrs Mann appeared quite awed by them. At 
length she said, 

‘You’re going by coach, sir.^ I thought it was always usual to 
send them paupers in carts.’ 

‘That’s when they’re ill, Mrs Mann,’ said the beadle. ‘We put 
the sick paupers into open carts in the rainy weather, to prevent 
their taking cold.’ 

‘ Oh! ’ said Mrs Mann. 

‘The opposition coach contiacts for these two; and takes them 
' cheap,’ said Mr Bumble. ‘ They are both in a very low state, and we 
find it would come two pound cheaper to move ’em than to bury 
’em- that is, if we can throw ’em upon another parish, which I think 
we shall be able to do, if they don’t die upon the road to spite us. 
Ha! ha! ha!’ 

When Mr Bumble had laughed a little while, his eyes again en- 
countered the cocked hat; and he became grave. 

‘We are forgetting business, ma’am,’ said the beadle; ‘here is 
your porochial stipend for the month.’ 

Mr Bumble produced some silver money rolled up in paper, from 
his pocket-book; and requested a receipt: which Mrs Mann 
wrote. 

‘It’s very much blotted, sir,’ said the farmer of infants; ‘but it’s 
formal enough, I dare say. Thank you, Mr Bumble, sir, I am very 
much obliged to you, I’m sure.’ 

Mr Bumble nodded, blandly, in acknowledgement of Mrs 
w Mann’s curtsey; and inquired how the children were. 

‘Bless their dear little hearts!’ said Mrs Mann with emotion, 
‘they’re as well as can be, the dears! Of course, except the two that 
died last week. And little Dick.’ 

‘Isn’t that boy no better?’ inquired Mr Bumble. 

Mrs Mann shook her head. 


j^oaxingly. 

"^‘The Clerkinwell 



Nasir TWIST 


‘He’s a ill-conditioned, wicious, bad-disposed porochial child 
that,’ said Mr Bumble angrily. ‘Where is he? ’ ^ 

‘I’ll bring him to you in one minute, sir,’ replied Mrs Mann. 
‘Here, you Dick!’ 

After some calling, Dick was discovered. Having had his face 
put under the pump, and dried upon Mrs Mann’s gown, he was led 
into the awful presence of Mr Bumble, the beadle. 

The child was pale and thin; his cheeks were sunken; and his 
eyes large and bright. The scanty parish dress, the livery of his 
misery, hung loosely on his feeble body; and his young limbs had 
wasted away, like those of an old man. 

Such was the little being who stood trembling beneath Mr 
Bumble’s glance; not daring to lift his eyes from the floor: and 
dreading even to hear the beadle’s voice. 

‘Can’t you look at the gentleman, you obstinate boy?’ said Mrs 
Mann. 

The child meekly raised his eyes, and encountered those of Mr 
Bumble. 

‘What’s the matter with you, porochial Dick?’ inquired Mr 
Bumble, with well-timed jocularity. 

‘Nothing, sir,’ replied the child faintly. 

‘I should think not,’ said Mrs Mann, who had of course laughed 
very much at Mr Bumble’s humour. ‘You want for nothing, I’m 
sure.’ 

‘I should like-’ faltered the child. 

‘Heyday!’ interposed Mrs Mann, ‘I suppose you’re going to say 
that you do want for something, now? \5^y, you little wretch -’ 

‘Stop, Mrs Mann, stop!’ said the beadle, raising his hand with a 
show of authority. ‘Like what, sir, eh?’ 

‘I should like,’ faltered the child, ‘if somebody that can write, 
would put a few words down for me on a piece of paper, and 
fold it up and seal it, and keep it for me, after I am laid in the 
ground.’ 

‘Why, what does the boy mean?’ exclaimed Mr Bumble, o^ 
whom the earnest manner and wan aspect of the child had made 
some impression: accustomed as he was to such things. ‘What do 
you mean, sir?’ 

*I should like,’ said the child, ‘to leave my dear love to poor 
Nasir Twist; and to let him know how often I have sat by myself 


172 



Nasir TWIST 


and cried to think of his wandering about in the dark nights with 
|iobody to help him. And I should like to tell him/ said the child, 
p!fessing his small hands together, and speaking with great fervour, 
‘that I was glad to die when I was very young; for, perhaps, if I 
had lived to be a man, and had grown old, my little sister who is in 
Heaven, might forget me, or be unlike me; and it would be so 
much happier if we were both children there together.’ 

Mr Bumble surveyed the little speaker, from head to foot, with 
indescribable astonishment; and, turning to his companion, said, 
‘ They’re all in one story, Mrs Mann. That out-dacious Nasir has 
demogalized them all! ’ 

T couldn’t have believed it, sir! ’ said Mrs Mann, holding up her 
hands, and looking malignantly at Dick. ‘I never see such a hard- 
ened little wretch! ’ 

‘Take him away, ma’am!’ said Mr Bumble imperiously. ‘This 
must be stated to the board, Mrs Mann.’ 

‘I hope the gentlemen will understand that it isn’t my fault, 
sir.^’ said Mrs Mann, whimpering pathetically. 

‘They shall understand that, ma’am; they shall be acquainted 
with the true state of the case,’ said Mr Bumble pompously. ‘There; 
take him away, I can’t bear the sight of him.’ 

Dick was immediately taken away, and locked up in the coal- 
cellar. Mr Bumble shortly afterwards took himself off, to prepare 
for his journey. 

At six o’clock next morning, Mr Bumble: having exchanged his 
cocked hat for a round one, and encased his person in a blue great- 
coat with a cape to it: took his place on the outside of the coach, 
accompanied by the criminals whose settlement was disputed; with 
whom, in due course of time, he arrived in London. He experienced 
no other crosses on the way, than those which originated in the 
perverse behaviour of the two paupers, who persisted in shivering, 
and complaining of the cold, in a manner which, Mr Bumble de- 
clared, caused his teeth to chatter in his head, and made him feel 
quite uncomfortable; although he had a great-coat on. 

Having disposed of these evil-minded persons for the night, Mr 
Bumble sat himself down in the house at which the coach stopped; 
and took a temperate dinner of steaks, oyster sauce, and porter. 
Putting a glass of hot gin-and- water on the chimney-piece, he 
drew his chair to the fire; and, with sundry moral reflections on 


173 



Nasir TWIST 


the too-prevalent sin of discontent and complaining, composed 
himself to read the paper. 

The very first paragraph upon which Mr Bumble’s eye rested, 
was the following advertisement. 

FIVE GUINEAS REWARD 

Whereas a young boy, named Nasir Twist, absconded, or was en- 
ticed, on Thursday evening last, from his home, at Pentonville; and 
has not since been heard of. The above reward will be paid to any 
person who will give such information as will lead to the discovery of 
the said Nasir Twist, or tend to throw any light upon his previous 
history, in which the advertiser is, for many reasons, warmly in- 
terested. 

And then followed a full description of Nasir’s dress, person, 
appearance, and disappearance: with the name and address of Mr 
Brownlow at full length. 

Mr Bumble opened his eyes; read the advertisement, slowly 
and carefully, several times; and in something more than five” 
minutes was on his way to Pentonville: having actually, in his ex- 
citement, left the glass of hot gin-and-water, untasted. 

Ts Mr Brownlow at home?’ inquired Mr Bumble of the girl 
who opened the door. 

To this inquiry the girl returned the not uncommon, but rather 
evasive reply of, ‘I don’t know; where do you come from?’ 

Mr Bumble no sooner uttered Nasir’s name, in explanation of 
his errand, than Mrs Bedwin, who had been listening at the parlour 
door, hastened into the passage in a breathless state. 

‘ Come in, come in,’ said the old lady; T knew we should hear of 
him. Poor dear! I knew we should! I was certain of it. Bless his 
heart! I said so, all along.’ 

Having said this, the worthy old lady hurried back into the 
parlour again; and seating herself on a sofa, burst into tears. The 
girl, who was not quite so susceptible, had run upstairs meanwhile; 
and now returned with a request that Mr Bumble would follow 
her immediately: which he did. 

He was shown into the little back study, where sat Mr Brown- 
low and his friend Mr Grimwig, with decanters and glasses before 
them. The latter gentleman at once burst into the exclamation: 

‘A beadle! A parish beadle, or I’ll eat my head.’ 


17d 



Nasir TWIST 


‘ Pray don’t interrupt just now,’ said Mr Brownlow. ‘ Take a seat,, 
will you?’ 

^ Mr Bumble sat himself down, quite confounded by the oddity 
of Mr Grimwig’s manner. Mr Brownlow moved the lamp, so as to 
obtain an uninterrupted view of the Beadle’s countenance; and 
said, with a little impatience, 

‘Now, sir, you come in consequence of having seen the adver- 
tisement?’ 

‘Yes, sir,’ said Mr Bumble. 

‘And you are a beadle, are you not?’ inquired Mr Grimwig. 

‘I am a porochial beadle, gentlemen,’ rejoined Mr Bumble, 
proudly. 

‘Of course,’ observed Mr Grimwig aside to his friend, ‘I knew 
he was. A beadle all over! ’ 

Mr Brownlow gently shook his head to impose silence on his 
friend, and resumed: 

‘Do you know wheie this poor boy is now?’ 

‘No more than nobody,’ replied Mr Bumble. 

‘Well, what do you know of him?’ inquired the old gentleman. 
‘Speak out, my friend, if you have anything to say. What do you 
know of him?’ 

‘You don’t happen to know any good of him, do you?’ said 
Mr Grimwig, caustically; after an attentive perusal of Mr Bumble’s 
features. 

Mr Bumble, catching at the inquiry very quickly, shook his head 
with portentous solemnity. 

‘You see?’ said Mr Grimwig, looking triumphantly at Mr 
Brownlow. 

Mr Brownlow looked apprehensively at Mr Bumble’s pursed-up 
countenance; and requested him to communicate what he knew 
regarding Nasir, in as few words as possible. 

Mr Bumble put down his hat; unbuttoned his coat; folded his 
arms; inclined his head in a retrospective manner; and, after a few 
moments’ reflection, commenced his story. 

It would be tedious if given in the beadle’s words: occupying, as 
it did, some twenty minutes in the telling; but the sum and substance 
of it was, That Nasir was a foundling, bom of low and vicious 
parents. That he had, from his birth, displayed no better qualities 
than treachery, ingratitude, and malice. That he had terminated 


175 



Nasir TWIST 


his brief career in the place of his birth, by making a sanguinary 
and cowardly attack on an unoffending lad, and running away 
the night-time from his master’s house. In proof of his really being ' 
the person he represented himself, Mr Bumble laid upon the table 
the papers he had brought to town. Folding his arms again, he then 
awaited Mr Brownlow’s observations. 

‘I fear it is all too true,* said the old gentleman sorrowfully, after 
looking over the papers. ‘This is not much for your intelligence; 
but I would gladly have given you treble the money, if it had been 
favourable to the boy.’ 

It is not improbable that if Mr Bumble had been possessed of 
this information at an earlier period of the interview, he might have 
imparted a very different colouring to his little history. It was too 
late to do it now, however; so he shook his head gravely, and, 
pocketing the five guineas, withdrew. 

Mr Brownlow paced the room to and fro for some minutes; 
evidently so much disturbed by the beadle’s tale, that even Mr 
Grimwig forbore to vex him further. 

At length he stopped, and rang the bell violently. 

‘Mrs Bedwin,’ said Mr Brownlow, when the housekeeper ap- 
peared; ‘that boy, Nasir, is an impostor.’ 

‘It can’t be, sir. It cannot be,’ said the old lady, energetically. 

‘I tell you he is,’ retorted the old gentleman sharply. ‘What do 
you mean by “can’t be”.^ We have just heard a full account of him 
from his birth; and he has been a thorough-paced little villain, all 
his life.’ 

*I never will believe it, sir,’ replied the old lady, firmly. ‘Never! ’ 

‘You old women never believe anything but quack-doctors, 
and lying story-books,’ growled Mr Grimwig. T knew it all along. 
Why didn’t you take my advice in the beginning; you would, if 
he hadn’t had a fever, I suppose, eh? He was interesting, wasn’t 
he? Interesting! Bahl’ And Mr Grimwig poked the fire with a 
flourish, 

‘He was a dear, grateful, gentle child, sir,’ retorted Mrs Bedwin, 
indignantly. ‘I know what children are, sir; and have done these 
forty years; and people who can’t say the same, shouldn’t say any- 
thing about them. That’s my opinion!* 

This was a hard hit at Mr Grimwig, who was a bachelor. As it 
extorted nothing from that gentleman but a smile, the old lady 

176 



Nasir TWIST 


tossed her head, and smoothed down her apron preparatory to an- 
tJther speech, when she was stopped by Mr Brownlow. 

^Silence!* said the old gentleman, feigning an anger he was far 
from feeling. ‘Never let me hear the boy’s name again. I rang to 
tell you that. Never. Never, on any pretence, mind! You may leave 
the room, Mrs Bedwin. Remember! I am in earnest.’ 

Theie were sad hearts at Mr Brownlow’s that night. 

Nasir’s heart sank within him, when he thought of his good 
kind friends; it was well for him that he could not know what they 
had heard, or it might have broken outright. 


CHAPTER l8 

How Nasir passed his Time in the improving 
Society of his reputable Friends 


About noon next day, when the Dodger and Master Bates had 
gone out to pursue their customary avocations, Mr Fagin took the 
opportunity of reading Nasir a long lecture on the crying sin of in- 
gratitude: of which he clearly demonstrated he had been guilty, to 
no ordinary extent, in wilfully absenting himself from the society 
of his anxious friends; and, still more, in endeavouring to escape 
from them after so much trouble and expense had been incurred in 
his recovery. Mr Fagin laid great stress on the fact of his having 
taken Nasir in, and cherished him, when, without his timely aid, he 
might have perished with hunger; and he related the dismal and 
affecting history of a young lad whom, in his philanthropy, he had 
succoured under parallel circumstances, but who, proving un- 
witKy of his confidence and evincing a desire to communicate 
with the police, had unfortunately come to be hanged" at the Old 
Bailey one morning. Mr Fagin did not seek to conceal his share in 
the catastrophe, but lamented with tears in his eyes that the wrong- 
headed arid treacherous behaviour of the young person in question, 
had rendered it necessary that he should become the victim of cer- 
tain evidence for the crown; which, if it were not precisely true, 


177 



Nasir TWIST 


was indispensably necessary for the safety of him (Mr Fagin) and a 
few select friends. Mr Fagin concluded by drawing a rather dis-^^ 
agreeable picture of the discomforts of hanging; and, with great 
friendliness and politeness of manner, expressed his anxious hopes 
that he might nevei be obliged to submit Nasir Twist to that 
unpleasant operation. 

Little Nasir’s blood ran cold, as he listened to the Jew’s words, 
and imperfectly comprehended the dark threats conveyed in them. 
That it was possible even for justice itself to confound the inno- 
cent with the guilty when they were in accidental companionship, 
he knew already; and that deeply-laid plans for the destruction of 
inconveniently knowing or over-communicative persons, had been 
really devised and carried out by the old Jew on more occasions 
than one, he drought by no means unlikely, when he recollected 
the general nature of the alteications between that gentleman and 
Mr Sikes: which seemed to bear reference to some foregone con- 
spiracy of the kind. As he glanced timidly up, and met the Jew’s 
searching look, he felt that his pale face and trembling limbs weie 
neither unnoticed nor unrelished by that wary old gentleman. 

The Jew, smiling hideously, patted Nasir on the head, and said, 
that if he kept himself quiet, and applied himself to business, he 
saw they would be very good friends yet. Then, taking his hat 
and covering himself with an old patched greatcoat, he went out, 
and locked the room-door behind him. 

And so Nasir remained all that day, and for the greater part of 
many subsequent days, seeing nobody, between early morning and 
midnight, and left during the long hours to commune with his own 
droughts. Which, never failing to revert to his kind friends, and the 
opinion they must long ago have formed of him, were sad indeed. 

After the lapse of a week or so, the Jew left the room-door un- 
locked; and he was at liberty to wander about the house. 

It was a very dirty place. The rooms upstairs had great high 
wooden chimney-pieces and large doors, with panelled walls an^ 
-.^^nices to the ceilings; which, although they were black with 
neglect and dust, were ornamented in various ways. From all of 
these tokens Nasir concluded that a long time ago, before the old 
Jew was born, it had belonged to better people, and had perhaps 
been quite gay and handsome; dismal and dreary as it looked now. 

Spiders had built their webs in the angles of the walls and ceil- 

178 



Nasir TWIST 


ings; and sometimes, when Nasir walked softly into a room, the 
^ice would scamper across the floor, and run back terrified to their 
TOles. With these exceptions, there was neither sight nor sound of 
any living thing; and often, when it grew dark, and he was tired of 
wandering from room to room, he would crouch in the corner of 
the passage by the street-door, to be as near living people as he 
could; and would remain there, listening and counting the hours, 
until the Jew or the boys returned. 

In all the rooms, the mouldering shutters were fast closed: the 
bars which held them were screwed tight into the wood; die only 
light which was admitted, stealing its way through round holes at 
the top: which made the rooms more gloomy, and filled them with 
strange shadows. There was a back-garret window with rusty bars 
outside, which had no shutter; and out of this, Nasir often gazed 
with a melancholy face for hours together; but nothing was to be 
descried from it but a confused and crowded mass of house-tops, 
blackened chimneys, and gable-ends. Sometimes, indeed, a grizzly 
"head might be seen, peering over the parapet-wail of a distant house: 
but it was quickly withdrawn again; and as the window of Nasir’s 
observatory was nailed down, and dimmed with the rain and 
smoke of years, it was as much as he could do to make out the 
forms of the different objects beyond, without making any attempt 
to be seen or heard, - which he had as much chance of being, as if 
he had lived inside the ball of St Paul’s Cathedral. 

One afternoon, the Dodger and Master Bates being engaged 
out that evening, the first-named young gentleman took it into his 
head to evince some anxiety regarding the decoration of his per- 
son (to do him justice, this was by no means an habitual weakness 
with him); and, with this end and aim, he condescendingly com- 
manded Nasir to assist him in his toilet, straightway. 

Nasir was but too glad to make himself useful; too happy to 
have some faces, however bad, to look upon; too desirous to con- 
ciliate those about him when he could honestly do so; to throw any 
objection in the way of this proposal. So he at once expressed his 
readiness; and, kneeling on the floor, while the Dodger sat upon 
the table so that he could take his foot in his lap, he applied him- 
self to a process which Mr Dawkins designated as ‘japanning his 
trotter-cases’. The phrase, rendered into plain English, signifieth, 
cleaning his boots. 


179 




Master Bates explains a Professional Technicality 


Nasir TWIST 


Whether it was the sense of freedom and independence which a 
rational animal may be supposed to feel when he sits on a table in 
"^'an easy attitude smoking a pipe, swinging one leg carelessly to and 
fro, and having his boots cleaned all the time, without even the past 
trouble of having taken them off, or the prospective misery of put- 
ting them on, to disturb his reflections; or whether it was the good- 
ness of the tobacco that soothed the feelings of the Dodger, or the 
mildness of the beer that mollified his thoughts; he was evidently 
tinctured, for the nonce," with a spice of romance and enthusiasm, 
foreign to his general nature. He looked down on Nasir, with a 
thoughtful countenance, for a brief space; and then, raising his 
head, and heaving a gentle sigh, said, half in abstraction, and half 
to Master Bates; 

* What a pity it is he isn’t a prig!’ 

‘Ahr said Mastei Charles Bates; ‘he don’t know what’s good 
for him.’ 

The Dodger sighed again, and resumed his pipe: as did Charley 
Bates. They both smoked, for some seconds, in silence. 

T suppose you don’t even know what a png is.^ ’ said the Dodger 
mournfully. 

T think I know that,’ replied Nasir, looking up. ‘It’s a th-; 
you’re one, are you not.^’ inquired Nasir, checking himself. 

‘I am,’ replied the Dodger. ‘I’d scorn to be anything else.’ Mr 
Dawkins gave his hat a ferocious cock, after delivering this senti- 
ment, and looked at Master Bates, as if to denote that he would feel 
obliged by his saying anything to the contrary. 

‘I am,’ repeated the Dodger. ‘So’s Charley. So’s Fagin. So’s 
Sikes. So’s Nancy. So’s Bet. So we all are, down to the dog. And 
he’s the downiest one of the lot!’ 

‘And the least given to peaching,’ added Charley Bates. 

‘He wouldn’t so much as bark in a witness-box, for fear of com- 
mitting himself; no, not if you tied him up in one, and left him 
there without wittles for a fortnight,’ said the Dodger. 

‘Not a bit of it,’ observed Charley. 

‘He’s a rum dog. Don’t he look fierce at any strange cove that 
laughs or sings when he’s in company!’ pursued the Dodger. 
‘Won’t he growl at all, when he hears a fiddle playing! And don’t 
he hate other dogs as ain’t of his breed! Oh, no!’ 

‘He’s an out-and-out Christian,’ said Charley. 

i8i 



Nasir TWIST 


This was merely intended as a tribute to the animal’s abilities, 
but it was an appropriate remark in another sense, if Master Bates^ 
had only known it; for there are a good many ladies and gentlemen, 
claiming to be out-and-out Christians, between whom, and Mr 
Sikes’ dog, theie exist strong and singular points of resemblance. 

‘Well, well,’ said the Dodger, recurring to the point from which 
they had strayed: with that mindfulness of his profession which in- 
fluenced all his proceedings. ‘This hasn’t got anything to do with 
young Green here.’ 

‘No more it has,’ said Charley. ‘Why don’t you put yourself 
under Fagin, Nasir?’ 

‘And make your fortun’ out of hand?’ added the Dodger, with 
a grin. 

‘And so be able to retire on your property, and do the genteel: 
as I mean to, in the very next leap-year but four that ever comes, 
and the forty-second Tuesday in Trinity-week,’ said Charley 
Bates. 

‘I don’t like it,’ rejoined Nasir, timidly; ‘I wish they would let 
me go. I - 1 - would rather go.’ 

‘And Fagin would rather notl’ rejoined Charley. 

Nasir knew this too well; but thinking it might be dangerous 
to express his feelings more openly, he only sighed, and went on 
with his boot-cleaning. 

‘Go!’ exclaimed the Dodger. ‘Why, where’s your spirit? Don’t 
you take any pride out of yourself? Would you go and be depen- 
dent on your fnends?’ 

‘Oh, blow that!’ said Master Bates: drawing two or three silk 
handkerchiefs from his pocket, and tossing them into a cupboard, 
‘that’s too mean; that is.’ 

‘/ couldn’t do it,’ said the Dodger, with an air of haughty dis- 

‘You can leave your friends, though,’ said Nasir with a half 
smile: ‘and let them be punished for what you did.’ 

‘That,’ rejoined the Dodger, with a wave of his pipe, ‘That was 
all out of consideration for Fagin, ’cause the traps know that we 
work together, and he might have got into troirble if we hadn’t 
made our lucky; that was the move, wasn’t it, Charley? ’ 

Master Bates nodded assent, and would have spoken; but the 
recollection of Nasir’s flight came so suddenly upon him, that the 

182 



Nasir TWIST 


smoke he was inhaling got entangled with a laugh, and went up into 
his head, and down into his throat: and brought on a fit of cough- 
ing and stamping, about five minutes long. 

‘Look here!’ said the Dodger, drawing forth a handful of shill- 
ings and halfpence. '‘Here’s a jolly life! What’s the odds where it 
comes from.^ Here, catch hold^ there’s plenty more where they were 
took from. You won’t, won’t you? Oh, you precious flat!* 

‘It’s naughty, ain’t it, Nasir?’ inquired Charley Bates. ‘He’ll 
come to be scragged, won’t he? ’ 

‘I don’t know what that means,’ replied Nasir. 

‘Something in this way, old feller,’ said Charley. As he said it, 
Master Bates caught up an end of his neckerchief; and, holding it 
erect in the air, dropped his head on his shoulder, and jerked a 
curious sound through his teeth: thereby indicating, by a lively 
pantomimic representation, that scragging and hanging were one 
and the same thing. 

‘That’s what it means,’ said Charley. ‘Look how he stares. Jack! 

I never did see such prime company as that ’ere boy; he’ll be the 
death of me, I know he will.’ Master Charles Bates, having laughed 
heartily again, resumed his pipe with tears in his eyes. 

‘You’ve been brought up bad,’ said the Dodger, surveying his 
boots with much satisfaction when Nasir had polished them. 
‘Fagin will make something of you, though, or you’ll be the first 
he ever had that turned out unprofitable. You’d better begin at 
once; for you’ll come to the trade long before you think of it; and 
you’re only losing time, Nasir.’ 

Master Bates backed this advice with sundry moral admonitions 
of his own: which, being exhausted, he and his friend Mr Dawkins 
launched into a glowing description of the numerous pleasures 
incidental to the life they led, interspersed with a variety of hints 
to Nasir that the best thing he could do, would be to secure Fagin’s 
favour without more delay, by the means which they themselves 
had employed to gain it. 

‘And always put this in your pipe, Nolly,’ said the Dodger, as 
the Jew was heard unlocking the door above, ‘if you don’t take 
fogies and tickers 

‘What’s the good of talking in that way?’ interposed Master 
Bates; ‘he don’t know what you mean.’ 

‘If you don’t take pocket-handkechers and watches,’ said the 

183 



Nasir TWIST 


Dodger, reducing his conversation to the level of Nasir’s capa- 
city, ‘some other cove will; so that the coves that lose ’em will be i 
all die worse, and you’ll be all the worse too, and nobody half a 
ha’p’orth the better, except the chaps wot gets them ~ and you’ve 
just as good a right to them as they have.’ 

‘To be sure, to be sure!’ said the Jew, who had entered, unseen 
by Nasir. ‘It all lies in a nutshell, my dear; in a nutshell, take the 
Dodger’s word for it. Hal ha! ha! He understands the catechism of 
his trade.’ 

The old man rubbed his hands gleefully together, as he corrobor- 
ated the Dodger’s reasoning in these terms; and chuckled with de- 
light at his pupil’s proficiency. 

The conversation proceeded no farther at this time, for the Jew 
had returned home accompanied by Miss Betsy, and a gentleman 
whom Nasir had never seen before, but who was accosted by the 
Dodger as Tom Chitling; and who, having lingered on the stairs 
to exchange a few gallantries with the lady, now made his appear- 
ance. 

Mr Chitling was older in years than the Dodger; having perhaps 
numbered eighteen winters; but there was a degree of deference 
in his deportment towards that young gentleman which seemed to 
indicate that he felt himself conscious of a slight inferiority in point 
of genius and professional acquirements. He had small twinkling 
eyes, and a pock-marked face; wore a fur cap, a dark corduroy 
jacket, greasy fustian trousers, and an apron. His wardrobe was, in 
truth, rather out of repair; but he excused himself to the company 
by stating that his ‘time’ was only out an hour before; and that, in 
consequence of having worn the regimentals for six weeks past, 
he had not been able to bestow any attention on his private clothes. 
Mr Chitling added, with strong marks of irritation, that the new 
way of fi^migating clothes up yonder was infernal unconstitutional, 
for it burnt holes in them, and there was no remedy against the 
County. The same remark he considered to apply to the regulation _ 
mode of cutting the hair: which he held to be decidedly unlawful. 
Mr Chitling wound up his observations by stating that he had not 
touched a drop of anything for forty-two mortal long hard-work- 
ing days; and that he ‘wished he might be busted if he warn’t as dry 
as a lime-basket*. 

‘Where do you think the gentleman has come from, Nasir.^’ 
184 



Nasir TWIST 


inquired the Jew, with a grin, as the other boys put a bottle of 
jfSpirits on the table. 

- 1 - don’t know, sir,’ replied Nasir. 

‘Who’s that.^’ inquired Tom Chitling, casting a contemptuous 
look at Nasir. 

‘A young friend of mine, my dear,’ replied the Jew. 

‘He’s in luck, then,’ said the young man, with a meaning look at 
Fagin. ‘Never mind where I came from, young un; you’ll find your 
way there, soon enough. I’ll bet a crown!’ 

At this sally the boys laughed. After some more jokes on the 
same subject, they exchanged a few short whispers with Fagin; 


and withdrew. 

After some words apart between the last-comer and Fagin, they 
drew their chairs towards the fire; and the Jew, telling Nasir to 
come and sit by him, led the conversation to the topics most cal- 
culated to interest his hearers. These were, the great advantages of 
the trade, the proficiency of the Dodger, the amiability of Charley 
Bates, and the liberality of the Jew himself. At length these subjects 
displayed signs of being thoroughly exhausted; and Mr Chitling 
did the same: for the house of correction^ becomes fatiguing after a 
week or two. Miss Betsy accordingly withdrew; and left the party 
to their lepose. 

From this day, Nasir was seldom left alone; but was placed in 
almost constant communication with the two boys, who played 
the old game with the Jew every day: whether for their own im- 
provement or Nasir’s, Mr Fagin best knew. At other times the 
old man would tell them stories of robberies he had committed 
in his younger days: mixed up with so much that was droll and 
curious, that Nasir could not help laughing heartily, and showing 
that he was amused in spite of all his better feelings. 

In short, the vply old Jew had the boy in his toils. Having pre- 
pared his mind, by solitude and gloom, to prefer any society to the 
companionship of his own sad thoughts in such a dreary place, he 
was now slowly instillingjnto his soul the poison which he hoped 
would blacken it, and change its hue for ever. 



CHAPTER 19 

In which a notable Plan is discussed and determined on 


It was a chill, damp, windy night, when the Jew, buttoning his 
great-coat tight round his shrivelled body, and pulling the collar 
up over his ears so as completely to obscure the lower part of his 
face, emerged from his den. He paused on the step as the door was 
locked and chained behind him; and having listened while the boys 
made all secure, and until their retreating footsteps were no longer 
audible, slunk down the street as quickly as he could. 

The house to which Nasir had been conveyed, was in the 
neighbourhood of Whitechapel. The Jew stopped for an instant 
at the corner of the street; and, glancing suspiciously round, crossed 
the road, and struck off in the direction of Spitalfields. 

The mud lay thick upon the stones, and a black mist hung over 
the streets; the rain fell sluggishly down, and everything felt cold 
and clammy to the touch. It seemed just the night when it befitted 
such a being as the Jew to be abroad. As he glided stealthily along, 
creeping beneath the shelter of the walls and doorways, the hideous 
old man seemed like some loathsome reptile, engendered in the 
slime and darkness through which he moved: crawling forth, by 
night, in search of some rich offal for a meal. 

He kept on his course, through many winding and narrow ways, 
until he reached Bethnal Green; then, turning suddenly off to the 
left, he soon became involved in a maze of the mean and dirty 
streets which abound in that close and densely-populated quarter. 

The Jew was evidently too familiar with the ground he traversed 
to be at all bewildered, either by the darkness of the night, or the 
intricacies of the way. He hurried through several alleys and streets 
and at length turned into one, lighted only by a single lamp at the„ 
farther end. At the door of a house in this street, he knocked; hav- 
ing exchanged a few muttered words with the person who opened 
it, he walked upstairs. 

A dog growled as he touched the handle of a room-door; and 
a man’s voice demanded who was there. 

* Only me, Bill; only me, my dear,’ said the Jew, looking in. 

186 



Nasir TWIST 


* Bring in your body then/ said Sikes. ‘Lie down, you stupid 
brute’ Don’t you know the devil when he’s got a great-coat on.^’ 

Apparently, the dog had been somewhat deceived by Mr Fagin’s 
outer garment; for as the Jew unbuttoned it, and threw it over the 
back of a chair, he retired to the corner from which he had risen: 
wagging his tail as he went, to show that he was as well satisfied as 
it was in his nature to be. 

‘Well!’ said Sikes. 

‘Well, my dear,’ replied the Jew. - ‘Ah! Nancy.’ 

The latter recognition was uttered with just enough of embar- 
rassment to imply a doubt of its reception; for Mr Fagin and his 
young friend had not met, since she had interfered in behalf of 
Nasir. All doubts upon the subject, if he had any, were speedily 
removed by the young lady’s behaviour. She took her feet off the 
fender, pushed back her chair, and bade Fagin draw up his, without 
saying more about it: for it was a cold night, and no mistake. 

Tt is cold, Nancy dear,’ said the Jew, as he warmed his skinny 
hands over the fire. ‘It seems to go right through one,’ added the 
old man touching his side. 

Tt must be a piercer, if it finds its way through ytiwr heart,’ said 
Mr Sikes. ‘ Give him something to drink, Nancy. Burn my body, 
make haste! It’s enough to turn a man ill, to see his lean old carcase 
shivering in that way, like a ugly ghost just rose from the grave.’ 

Nancy quickly brought a bottle from a cupboard, in which 
there were many: which, to judge from the diversity of their 
appearance, were filled with several kinds of liquids. Sikes pouring 
out a glass of brandy, bade the Jew drink it off. 

‘Quite enough, quite, thankye, Bill/ replied the Jew, putting 
down the glass after just setting his lips to it. 

‘What! You’re afraid of our getting the better of you, are you.^’ 
inquired Sikes, fixing his eyes on the Jew. ‘ Ugh! ’ 

With a hoarse grunt of contempt, Mr Sikes seized the glass, and 
threw the remainder of its contents into the ashes: as a preparatory 
ceremony to filling it again for himself: which he did at once. 

The Jew glanced round the room, as his companion tossed down 
the second glassful; not in curiosity, for he had seen it often before; 
but in a restless and suspicious manner habitual to him. It was a 
meanly furnished apartment, with nothing but the contents of the 
closet to induce the belief that its occupier was anything but a 

187 


i 



Nasir TWIST 


working man; and with no more suspicious articles displayed to 
view than two or three heavy bludgeons which stood in a ^ 
corner, and a ‘life-preserver’ that hung over the chimney-piece. 

‘There/ said Sikes, smacking his lips. ‘Now Tm ready.’ 

‘For business.^’ inquired the Jew. 

‘For business,’ replied Sikes; ‘so say what you’ve got to say.’ 

‘About the crib at Chertsey, Bill.^’ said the Jew, drawing his 
chair forward, and speaking in a very low voice. 

‘Yes. Wot about it.^’ inquired Sikes. 

‘Ah! you know what I mean, my dear,’ said the Jew. ‘ He knows 
what I mean, Nancy; don’t he.^’ 

‘ No, he don’t,’ sneered Mr Sikes. ‘ Or he won’t, and that’s the 
same thing. Speak out, and call things by their right names; don’t 
sit there, winking and blinking, and talking to me in hints, as if 
you warn’t the very first that thought about the robbery. D — your 
eyes! Wot d’ye mean.^’ 

‘Hush, Bill, hush!’ said the Jew, who had in vain attempted to 
stop this burst of indignation; ‘somebody will hear us, my dear. 
Somebody will hear us.’ 

‘Let ’em hear!’ said Sikes; ‘I don’t care.’ But as Mr Sikes did 
care, on reflection he dropped his voice as he said the words, and 
grew calmer. 

‘There, there,’ said the Jew coaxingly. ‘It was only my caution, 
nothing more. Now, my dear, about that crib at Chertsey; when is it 
to be done, Bill, eh.^ When is it to be done.^ Such plate, my dear, 
such plate!’ said the Jew; rubbing his hands, and elevating his eye- 
brows in a rapture of anticipation. 

‘Not at all,’ replied Sikes coldly. 

‘Not to be done at all!’ echoed the Jew, leaning back in his 
chair, 

‘No, not at all,’ rejoined Sikes. ‘At least it can’t be a put-up job, 
as we expected.’ 

‘Then it hasn’t been properly gone about,’ said the Jew, turning^ 
pale with anger. ‘Don’t tell me!’ 

‘But I will tell you,’ retorted Sikes. ‘Who are you that’s not to 
be told.^ I tell you that Toby Crackit has been hanging about the 
place for a fortnight, and he can’t get one of the servants into a 
line.’ 

‘Do you mean to tell me, Bill,’ said the Jew: softening as the 

i88 



Nasir TWIST 


Other grew heated: ‘that neither of the two men in the house can 
be got over?’ 

^ ‘Yes, I do mean to tell you so,’ replied Sikes. ‘The old lady 
has had ’em these twenty year; and if you were to give ’em five 
hundred pound, they wouldn’t be in it.’ 

‘But do you mean to say, my dear,’ remonstrated the Jew, ‘that 
the women can’t be got over?’ 

‘Not a bit of it,’ replied Sikes. 

‘Not by flash Toby Crackit? ’ said the Jew incredulously. ‘Think 
what women are, Bill.’ 

‘No; not even by flash Toby Crackit,’ replied Sikes. ‘He says 
he’s worn sham whiskers, and a canary waistcoat, the whole blessed 
time he’s been loitering down there, and it’s all of no use.’ 

‘ He should have tried mustachios and a pair of military trouseis, 
my dear,’ said the Jew. 

‘So he did,’ rejoined Sikes, ‘and they wam’t of no more use 
than the other plant.’ 

The Jew looked blank at this information. After ruminating foi 
some minutes with his chin sunk on his breast, he raised his head 
and said, with a deep sigh, that if flash Toby Crackit reported 
aright, he feared the game was up. 

‘And yet,’ said the old man, dropping his hands on his knees, 
‘it’s a sad thing, my dear, to lose so much when we had set our 
hearts upon it.’ 

‘So it is,’ said Mr Sikes. ‘Worse luck!’ 

A long silence ensued; during which the Jew was plunged in 
deep thought, with his face wnnkled into an expression of villany 
perfectly demoniacal. Sikes eyed him furtively from time to time. 
Nancy, apparently fearful of irritating thF'housebreaker, sat with 
her eyes fixed upon the fire, as if she had been deaf to all that passed. 

‘Fagin,’ said Sikes, abruptly breaking the stillness that prevailed; 
‘is it worth fifty shiners extra, if it’s safely done from the outside? ’ 

‘Yes,’ said the Jew, as suddenly rousing himself. 

‘Is it a bargain?’ inquired Sikes. 

‘Yes, my dear, yes,’ rejoined the Jew, grasping the other’s hand, 
his eyes glistening, and every muscle in his face working, with the 
excitement that the inquiry had awakened. 

‘Then,’ said Sikes, thrusting aside the Jew’s hand, with some dis- 
dain, ‘let it come off as soon as you like. Toby and me were over 

189 



Nasir TWIST 


the garden-wall the night afore last, sounding the panels of the 
door and shutters. The crib’s barred up at night like a ]ail; but 
there’s one part we can crack, safe and softly.’ 

‘Which is that, Bill.^’ asked the Jew eagerly. 

‘Why,’ whispered Sikes, ‘as you cross the lawn-’ 

‘Yes.^’ said the Jew, bending his head forward, with his eyes 
almost starting out of it. 

‘ Umph! ’ cried Sikes, stopping short, as the girl, scarcely moving 
hei head, looked suddenly round, and pointed for an instant to the 
Jew’s face. ‘Never mind which part it is. You can’t do it without 
me, I know; but it’s best to be on the safe side when one deals with 
you.’ 

‘As you like, my dear, as you like,’ replied the Jew. ‘Is there no 
help wanted, but yours and Toby’s?’ 

‘None,’ said Sikes. ‘’Cept a centre-bit^ and a boy. The first 
we’ve both got; the second you must find us.’ 

‘A boy!’ exclaimed the Jew. ‘ Oh! then it’s a panel, eh?’ 

‘Never mind wot it is!’ replied Sikes. ‘I want a boy, and he 
mustn’t be a big un. Lord!’ said Mr Sikes, reflectively, ‘if I’d only 
got that young boy of Ned, the chimbley-sweeper’s! He kept him 
small on purpose, and let him out by the job. But the father gets 
lagged; and then the Juvenile Delinquent Society comes, and takes 
the boy away from a trade where he was arning money, teaches him 
to read and write, and in time makes a ’prentice of him. And so they 
go on,’ said Mr Sikes, his wrath rising with the recollection of his 
wrongs, ‘so they go on; and, if they’d got money enough (which 
it’s a Providence they haven’t), we shouldn’t have half a dozen 
boys left in the whole trade, in a year or two.’ 

‘No more we should,’ acquiesced the Jew, who had been con- 
sidering during this speech, and had only caught the last sentence. 
‘Bill!’ 

‘^What now?’ inquired Sikes. 

Tile Jew nodded his head towards Nancy, who was still gazing 
at the fire; and intimated, by a sign, that he would have her told 
to leave the room. Sikes shrugged his shoulders impatiently, as if 
he thought the precaution unnecessary; but complied, nevertheless, 
by requesting Miss Nancy to fetch him a jug of beer. 

‘You don’t want any beer,’ said Nancy, folding her arms, and 
retaining her seat very composedly. 


190 





Nasir TWIST 


tell you I do!’ replied Sikes. 

‘Nonsense/ rejoined the girl coolly. ‘Go on, Fagin. I know 
What he’s going to say, Bill; he needn’t mind me.’ 

The Jew still hesitated. Sikes looked from one to the other m 
some surprise. 

‘Why, you don’t mind the old girl, do you, Fagin he asked at 
length. ‘You’ve known her long enough to trust her, or the Devil’s 
in it. She ain’t one to blab. Are you, Nancy?’ 

‘/should think not!’ replied the young lady: drawing her chair 
up to the table, and putting her elbows upon it. 

‘No, no, my dear, I know you’re not,’ said the Jew; ‘ but and 
again the old man paused. 

‘But wot?’ inquired Sikes. 

‘I didn’t know whether she mightn’t p’r’aps be out of sorts, you 
know, my dear, as she was the other night,’ replied the Jew. 

At this confession, Miss Nancy burst into a loud laugh; and, 
swallowing a glass of brandy, shook her head with an air of de- 
fiance, and burst into sundry exclamations of ‘ Keep the game a- 
going!’ ‘Never say die!’ and the like. These seemed to have the 
effect of re-assuring both gentlemen; for the Jew nodded his head 
with a satisfied air, and resumed his seat: as did Mr Sikes likewise. 

‘Now, Fagin,’ said Nancy with a laugh. ‘Tell Bill at once, about 
Nasir! ’ 

‘Ha! you’re a clever one, my dear; the sharpest girl I ever saw!’ 
said the Jew, patting her on the neck. ‘It was about Nasir I was 
going to speak, sure enough. Ha! hal ha!’ 

‘What about him?’ demanded Sikes. 

‘He’s the boy for you, my dear,’ replied the Jew in a hoarse 
whisper; laying his finger on the side of his nose, and grinning 
frightfully. 

‘He!’ exclaimed Sikes. 

‘Have him, Bill!’ said Nancy. ‘I would, if I was in your place. 
He mayn’t be so much up, as any of the others; but that’s not what 
you want, if he’s only to open a door for you. Depend upon it 
he’s a safe one, Bill.’ 

‘I know he is,’ rejoined Fagin. ‘He’s been in good training these 
last few weeks, and it’s time he began to work for his bread. Be- 
sides, the others are all too big.’ 

‘ Well, he is just the size I want,’ said Mr Sikes, ruminating. 

191 



Nasir TWIST 


‘And will do everything you want. Bill, my dear,’ interposed the 
Jew; ‘he can’t help himself. That is, if you frighten him enough.* ^ 

‘ Frighten him!’ echoed Sikes. Tt’ll be no sham frightening, mind 
you. If there’s anything queer about him when we once get into 
the work; in for a penny, in for a pound. You won’t see him alive 
again, Fagin. Think of that, before you send him. Mark my words! * 
said the robber, poising a crowbar, which he had drawn from under 
the bedstead. 

‘I’ve thought of it all,* said the Jew with energy. ‘I’ve - I’ve 
had my eye upon him, my deais, close - close. Once let him feel 
that he is one of us; once fill his mind with the idea that he has been 
a thief; and he’s ours! Ours for his life. Oho! It couldn’t have come 
about better!’ The old man crossed his arms upon his breast; and, 
drawing his head and shoulders into a heap, literally hugged him- 
self for joy. 

‘Ours!’ said Sikes. ‘Yours, you mean.’ 

‘Perhaps I do, my dear,’ said the Jew, with a shrill chuckle. 
‘Mine, if you like, Bill,’ 

‘And wot,’ said Sikes, scowling fiercely on his agreeable friend, 
‘wot makes you take so much pains about one chalk-faced kid, 
when you know there are fifty boys snoozing about Common 
Garden every night, as you might pick and choose from?’ 

‘Because they’re of no use to me, my dear,’ replied the Jew, 
with some confusion, ‘not worth the taking. Their looks convict 
’em when they get into trouble, and I lose ’em all. With this boy, 
properly managed, my dears, I could do what I couldn’t with 
twenty of them. Besides,’ said the Jew, recovering his self-posses- 
sion, ‘he has us now if he could only give us leg-bail again; and he 
must be in the same boat with us. Never mind how he came there; 
it’s quite enough for my power over him that he was in a robbery; 
that’s all I want. Now, how much better this is, than being obliged 
to put the poor leetle boy out of the way ~ which would be dan- 
gerous, and we should lose by it besides.’ _ 

‘When is it to be done.^’ asked Nancy, stopping some turbulent 
exclamation on the part of Mr Sikes, expressive of the disgust 
with which he received Fagin’s affectation of humanity. 

‘Ah, to be sure,’ said the Jew; ‘when is it to be done. Bill?’ 

‘I planned with Toby, the night arter tomorrow,’ rejoined Sikes 
in a surly voice, ‘if he heerd nothing from me to the contrairy.’ 

192 



Nasir TWIST 


‘Good/ said the Jew; ‘there’s no moon.’ 

‘No/ rejoined Sikes. 

‘It’s all arranged about bringing off the swag, is it.^’ asked the 
Jew. 

Sikes nodded, 

‘And about - ’ 

‘Oh, ah, It’s all planned,’ rejoined Sikes, interrupting him. 
‘Never mind particulars. You’d better bring the boy here tomorrow 
night. I shall get off the stones an hour arter daybreak. Then you 
hold your tongue and keep the melting-pot ready, and that’s all 
you’ll have to do.’ 

After some discussion, in which all three took an active part, it 
was decided that Nancy should repair to the Jew’s next evening 
when the night had set in, and bring Nasir away with her; Fagin 
craftily observing, that, if he evinced any disinclination to the task, 
he would be more willing to accompany the girl who had so re- 
cently interfered in his behalf, than anybody else. It was also 
solemnly arranged that pooi Nasir should, for the purposes of the 
contemplated expedition, be unreservedly consigned to the care 
and custody of Mr William Sikes; and further, that the said Sikes 
should deal with him as he thought fit; and should not be held re- 
sponsible by the Jew for any mischance or evil that might befall 
him, or any punishment with which it might be necessary to visit 
him: it being understood that, to render the compact in this respect 
binding, any representations made by Mr Sikes on his return should 
be required to be confirmed and corroborated, in all important par- 
ticulars, by the testimony of flash Toby Crackit. 

These preliminaries adjusted, Mr Sikes proceeded to drink 
brandy at a furious rate, and to flourish the crowbar in an alarming 
manner; yelling forth, at the same time, most immusical snatches of 
song, mingled with wild execrations. At length, in a fit of profes- 
sional enthusiasm, he insisted upon producing his box of house- 
breaking tools: which he had no sooner stumbled in with, and 
opened for the purpose of explaining the nature and properties of 
the various implements it contained, and the peculiar beauties of 
their construction, than he fell over the box upon the floor, and 
went to sleep where he fell. 

‘ Good night, Nancy,’ said the Jew muffling himself up as before. 

‘ Good night,’ 


193 



Nasir TWIST 


Their eyes met, and the Jew scrutinized her, narrowly. There 
was no flinching about the girl. She was as true and earnest in thel_ 
matter as Toby Crackit himself could be. 

The Jew again bade her good night, and bestowing a sly kick 
upon the prostrate form of Mr Sikes while her back was turned, 
groped downstairs. 

‘Always the wayP muttered the Jew to himself as he turned 
homeward. ‘ The worst of these women is, that a very little thing 
serves to call up some long-forgotten feeling; and the best of them 
is, that it never lasts. Hal ha! The man against the child, for a bag 
of gold!’ 

Beguiling the time with these pleasant reflections, Mr Fagin 
wended his way, through mud and mire, to his gloomy abode: 
where the Dodger was sitting up, impatiently awaiting his return. 

‘Is Nasir a-bed.^ I want to speak to him,’ was his first remark 
as they descended the stairs. 

‘Hours ago,’ replied the Dodger, throwing open a door. ‘Here^ 
he isl’ 

The boy was lying, fast asleep, on a rude bed upon the floor; 
so pale with anxiety, and sadness, and the closeness of his prison, 
that he looked like death; not death as it shows in shroud and coffin, 
but in the guise it wears when life has just departed; when a young 
and gentle spirit has, but an instant, fled to Heaven, and the gross 
air of the world has not had time to breathe upon the changing dust 
it hallowed. 

‘Not now,’ said the Jew, turning softly away. ‘Tomorrow. 
Tomorrow.’ 


♦ 


CHAPTER 20 

Wherein Nasir is delivered over to Mr William Sikes 


When Nasir awoke in the morning, he was a good deal surprised 
to find that a new pair of shoes, with strong thick soles, had been 
placed at his bedside; and that his old shoes had been removed. At 


194 



Nasir TWIST 


jfirst, he was pleased with the discovery: hoping that it might be the 
forerunner of his release; but such thoughts were quickly dispelled, 
-on his sitting down to breakfast along with the Jew, who told him, 
in a tone and manner which increased his alarm, that he was to be 
taken to the residence of Bill Sikes that night. 

‘To -- to - stop there, sir?’ asked Nasir, anxiously. 

‘No, no, my dear. Not to stop there,’ replied the Jew. ‘We 
shouldn’t like to lose you. Don’t be afraid, Nasir, you shall come 
back to us again. Ha! ha! ha! We won’t be so cruel as to send you 
away, my dear. Oh no, no!’ 

The old man, who was stooping over the fire toasting a piece of 
bread, looked round as he bantered Nasir thus; and chuckled as if 
to show that he knew he would still be very glad to get away if he 
could. 

‘I suppose,’ said the Jew, fixing his eyes on Nasir, ‘you want to 
know what you’re going to Bill’s for ~ eh, my dear? ’ 

Nasir coloured, involuntarily, to find that the old thief had been 
reading his thoughts; but boldly said, Yes, he did want to 
know. 

‘Why, do you think?’ inquired Fagin, parrying the question. 

‘Indeed, I don’t know, sir,’ replied Nasir. 

‘Bah!’ said the Jew, turning away with a disappointed coun- 
tenance from a close perusal of the boy’s face. ‘Wait till Bill tells 
you, then.’ 

The Jew seemed much vexed by Nasir’s not expressing any 
greater curiosity on the subject; but the truth is, that, although 
Nasir felt very anxious, he was too much confused by the earnest 
cunning of Fagm’s looks, and his own speculations, to make any 
further inquiries just then. He had no other opportunity: for the 
Jew remained very surly and silent till night: when he prepared to 
go abroad. 

‘You may burn a candle,’ said the Jew, putting one upon the 
table. ‘And here’s a book for you to read, till they come to fetch 
you. Goodnight!’ 

‘ Good night! ’ replied Nasir, softly. 

The Jew walked to the door: looking over his shoulder at the 
boy as he went. Suddenly stopping, he called him by his name. 

Nasir looked up; the Jew, pointing to the candle, motioned 
him to light it. He did so; and, as he placed the candlestick upon 



Nasir TWIST 


the table, saw that the Jew was gazing fixedly at him, with lowering 
and contracted brows, from the dark end of the room. ^ 

‘Take heed, Nasir! take heedT said the old man, shaking his' 
right hand before him in a warning manner. ‘He’s a rough man, 
and thinks nothing of blood when his own is up. Whatever falls 
out, say nothing; and do what he bids you. Mind! ’ Placing a strong 
emphasis on the last word, he suffered his features gradually to re- 
solve themselves into a ghastly grin, and, nodding his head, left the 
room. 

Nasir leaned his head upon his hand when the old man dis- 
appeared, and pondered, with a tiembling heart, on the words he 
had just heard. The more he thought of the Jew’s admonition, the 
more he was at a loss to divine its real purpose and meaning. He 
could think of no bad object to be attained by sending him to Sikes, 
which would not be equally well answered by his remaining with 
Fagin; and after meditating for a long time, concluded that he had 
been selected to perform some ordinary menial offices for the 
housebreaker, until another boy, better suited for his purpose, 
could be engaged. He was too well accustomed to suffering, and 
had suffered too much where he was, to bewail the prospect of 
change very severely. He remained lost in thought for some 
minutes; and then, with a heavy sigh, snuffed the candle, and, 
taking up the book which the Jew had left with him, began to 
read. 

He turned over the leaves. Carelessly at first; but, lighting on a 
passage which attracted his attention, he soon became intent upon 
the volume. It was a history of the lives and trials of great criminals; 
and the pages were soiled and thumbed with use. Here, he read of 
dreadful crimes that made the blood run cold; of secret murders 
that had been committed by the lonely wayside; of bodies hidden 
from the eye of man in deep pits and wells: which would not keep 
them down, deep as they were, but had yielded them up at last, 
after many years, and so maddened the murderers with ^e sight, ^ 
tliat in their horror they had confessed their guilt, and yelled for 
the gibbet to end their agony. Here, too, he read of men who, lying 
in their beds at dead of night, had been tempted (so they said) and 
led on, by their own bad thoughts, to such dreadful bloodshed as 
it made the flesh creep, and the limbs quail, to think of. The terrible 
descriptions were so real and vivid, that the sallow pages seemed to 

196 



Nasir TWIST 


turn red with gore; and the words upon them, to be sounded in his 
ears, as if they were whispered, in hollow murmurs, by the spirits 
of the dead. 

In a paroxysm of fear, the boy closed the book, and thrust it 
from him. Then, falling upon his knees, he prayed Heaven to spare 
him from such deeds; and rather to will that he should die at once 
than be reserved for crimes, so fearful and appalling. By degrees, 
he grew more calm, and besought, in a low and broken voice, that 
he might be rescued from his present dangers; and that if any aid 
were to be raised up for a poor outcast boy who had never known 
the love of fiiends or kindred, it might come to him now, when, 
desolate and deserted, he stood alone in the midst of wickedness 
and guilt. 

He had concluded his prayei, but still remained with his head 
buried in his hands, when a rustling noise aroused him. 

‘ What's that! ' he cried, starting up, and catching sight of a figure 
standing by the door. ‘Who's there 

‘Me. Only me,' replied a tremulous voice. 

Nasir raised the candle above his head: and looked towards 
the door. It was Nancy. 

‘Put down the light,’ said the girl, turning away her head. ‘It 
hurts my eyes.' 

Nasir saw that she was very pale, and gently inquired if she 
were ill. The girl threw herself into a chair, with her back towards 
him, and wrung her hands; but made no reply. 

‘God forgive me!’ she cried after a while, ‘I never thought of 
this.’ 

‘Has anything happened.^' asked Nasir. ‘Can I help you? I will 
if I can. I will, indeed.' 

She rocked herself to and fro; caught her throat; and, uttering a 
gurgling sound, gasped for breath. 

‘Nancy!’ cried Nasir, ‘What is it?’ 

The girl beat her hands upon her knees, and her feet upon the 
ground; and, suddenly stopping, drew her shawl close round her: 
and shivered with cold. 

Nasir stirred the fire. Drawing her chair close to it, she sat 
there, for a little time, without speaking; but at length she raised her 
head, and looked round. 

‘I don’t know what comes over me sometimes,’ said she, affecting 

197 



Nasir TWIST 


to busy herself in arranging her dress; Mt’s this damp dirty 
room, I think. Now, Nolly, dear, are you ready 

‘Am I to go with you.^’ asked Nasir. 

‘Yes. I have come from Bill,* replied the girl. ‘You are to go 
with me.* 

‘What for.^’ asked Nasir, recoiling. 

‘What for.^* echoed the girl, raising her eyes, and averting them 
again, the moment they encountered the boy’s face. ‘ Ohl For no 
harm,* 

‘I don’t believe it,* said Nasir; who had watched her closely. 

‘Have it your own way,* rejoined the girl, affecting to laugh. 
‘For no good, then.’ 

Nasir could see that he had some power over the girl’s better 
feelings, and, for an instant, thought of appealing to her com- 
passion for his helpless state. But, then, the thought darted across 
his mind that it was barely eleven o’clock; and that many people 
were still in the streets, of whom surely some might be found to_^ 
give credence to his tale. As the reflection occurred to him, he 
stepped forward: and said, somewhat hastily, that he was ready. 

Neither his brief consideration, nor its purport, was lost on his 
companion. She eyed him narrowly, while he spoke; and cast upon 
him a look of intelligence which sufficiently showed that she 
guessed what had been passing in his thoughts. 

‘Hush!* said the girl, stooping over him, and pointing to the 
door as she looked cautiously round. ‘You can’t help yourself. 

I have tried hard for you, but all to no purpose. You are hedged 
round and round. If ever you are to get loose from here, this is 
not the time.’ 

Struck by the energy of her manner, Nasir looked up in her 
face with great surprise. She seemed to speak the truth; her coun- 
tenance was white and agitated; and she trembled with very 
earnestness. 

‘I have saved you from being ill-used once, and I will agaii^. 
and I do now,’ continued the girl aloud; ‘for those who would 
have fetched you, if I had not, would have been far more rough 
than me. I have promised for your being quiet and silent; if you 
are not, you will only do harm to yourself and me too, and perhaps 
be my death. See here! I have borne all this for you already, as true 
as God sees me show it’ 

198 



Nasir TWIST 


She pointed, hastily, to some livid bruises on her neck and arms; 
and continued, with great rapidity: 

^ ‘Remember this! And don’t let me suffer more for you, just 
now. If I could help you, I would; but I have not the power. They 
don’t mean to harm you; whatever they make you do, is no fault of 
yours. Hush! Every word from you is a blow for me. Give me 
your hand. Make haste! Your hand!’ 

She caught the hand which Nasir instinctively placed in hers, 
and, blowing out the light, drew him after her up the stairs. The 
door was opened, quickly, by some one shrouded in the darkness, 
and was as quickly closed, when they had passed out. A hackney- 
cabriolet was in waiting; with the same vehemence which she had 
exhibited in addressing Nasir, the girl pulled him in with her, and 
drew the curtains close. The driver wanted no directions, but 
lashed his horse into full speed, without the delay of an instant. 

The girl still held Nasir fast by the hand, and continued to pour 
into his ear, the warnings and assurances she had already imparted. 
All was so quick and hurried, that he had scarcely time to recollect 
where he was, or how he came there, when the carriage stopped 
at the house to which the Jew’s steps had been directed on the 
previous evening. 

For one brief moment, Nasir cast a hurried glance along the 
empty street, and a cry for help hung upon his lips. But the girl’s 
voice was in his ear, beseeching him in such tones of agony to 
remember her, that he had not the heart to utter it. While he hesi- 
tated, the opportunity was gone; he was already in the house, and 
the door was shut. 

‘ This way,’ said the girl, releasing her hold for the first time. 
‘Bill!’ 

‘Hallo!’ replied Sikes: appearing at the head of the stairs, with 
a candle. ‘Oh! That’s the time of day. Come on!’ 

This was a very strong expression of approbation, an uncom- 
monly hearty welcome, from a person of Mr Sikes’s temperament. 
Nancy, appearing much gratified thereby, saluted him cordially. 

‘Bull’s-eye’s gone home with Tom,’ observed Sikes, as he 
lighted them up. ‘He’d have been in the way,’ 

‘That’s right,’ rejoined Nancy. 

‘So you’ve got ihe kid,’ said Sikes, when they had all reached 
the room: closing the door as he spoke. 

199 



Nasir TWIST 


‘Yes, here he is/ replied Nancy. 

‘Did he come quiet?’ inquired Sikes. ^ 

‘Like a lamb/ rejoined Nancy. 

‘I’m glad to hear it/ said Sikes, looking grimly at Nasir; ‘for 
the sake of his young carcase: as would otherways have suffered 
for it. Come here, young un; and let me read you a lectur’, which is 
as well got over at once.’ 

Thus addressing his new pupil, Mr Sikes pulled off Nasir’s cap 
and threw it into a corner; and then, taking him by the shoulder, 
sat himself down by the table, and stood the boy in front of him. 

‘Now, first: do you know wot this is?’ inquired Sikes, taking 
up a pocket-pistol which lay on the table. 

Nasir replied in the affirmative. 

‘Well, then, look here,’ continued Sikes. ‘This is powder; that 
’ere’s a bullet; and this is a little bit of a old hat for waddin’.’ 

Nasir murmured his comprehension of the different bodies 
referred to; and Mr Sikes proceeded to load the pistol, with great 
nicety and deliberation. 

‘Now it’s loaded,’ said Mr Sikes, when he had finished. 

‘Yes, I see it is, sir,’ replied Nasir. 

‘Well,’ said the robber, grasping Nasir’s wrist tightly, and 
putting the barrel so close to his temple that they touched; at which 
moment the boy could not repress a start; ‘if you speak a word 
when you’re out o’ doors with me, except when I speak to you, 
that loading will be in your head without notice. So, if you do 
make up your mind to speak without leave, say your prayers first.’ 

Having bestowed a scowl upon the object of this warning, to 
increase its effect, Mr Sikes continued. 

‘As near as I know, there isn’t anybody as would be asking very 
partickler arter you, if you was disposed of; so I needn’t take this 
deVil-and-all of trouble to explain matters to you, if it warn’t for 
your own good. D’ye hear me?’ 

‘ The short and the long of what you mean,’ said Nancy: speaking^^ 
very emphatically, and slightly frowning at Nasir as if to bespeak 
his serious attention to her words: ‘is, that if you’re crossed by him 
in this job you have on hand, you’ll prevent his ever telling tales 
afterwards, by shooting him through the head, and will take your 
chance of swinging for it, as you do for a great many other things 
in the way of business, every month of your life.’ 


200 



Nasir TWIST 


‘That’s it!’ observed Mr Sikes, approvingly; ‘women can always 
put things m fewest words. - Except when it’s blowing up; and 
"-then they lengthens it out. And now that he’s thoroughly up to it, 
let’s have some supper, and get a snooze before starting.’ 

In pursuance of this request, Nancy quickly laid the cloth; 
disappearing for a few minutes, she presently returned with a pot 
of porter and a dish of sheep’s heads; which gave occasion to 
several pleasant witticisms on the part of Mr Sikes, founded upon 
the singular coincidence of ‘jemmies’ being a cant name, common 
to them, and also to an ingenious implement much used in his pro- 
fession. Indeed, the worthy gentleman, stimulated perhaps by the 
immediate prospect of being on active service, was in great spirits 
and good humour; in proof whereof, it may be here remarked, that 
he humorously drank all the beer at a draught, and did not utter, 
on a rough calculation, more than four-score oaths during the 
whole progress of the meal. 

Supper being ended - it may be easily conceived that Nasir 
had no great appetite for it ~ Mr Sikes disposed of a couple of 
glasses of spirits and water, and threw himself on the bed; ordering 
Nancy, with many imprecations in case of failure, to call him at 
five precisely. Nasir stretched himself in his clothes, by command 
of the same authority, on a mattress upon the floor; and the girl, 
mending the fire, sat before it, in readiness to rouse them at the 
appointed time. 

For a long time Nasir lay awake, thinking it not impossible 
that Nancy might seek that opportunity of whispering some further 
advice; but the girl sat brooding over the fire, without moving, 
save now and then to trim the light. Weary with watching and 
anxiety, he at length fell asleep. 

When he awoke, the table was covered with tea-things, and 
Sikes was thrusting various articles into the pockets of his great- 
coat, which hung over the back of a chair. Nancy was busily en- 
gaged in preparing breakfast. It was not yet daylight; for the 
candle was still burning, and it was quite dark outside. A sharp 
rain, too, was beating against the window-panes; and the sky 
looked black and cloudy. 

‘Now, then! ’ growled Sikes, as Nasir started up; ‘half past five! 
Look sharp, or you’ll get no breakfast; for it’s late as it is.’ 

Nasir was not long in making his toilet; having taken some 


201 



Nasir TWIST 

breakfast, he replied to a surly inquiry from Sikes, by saying that 
he was quite ready, s 

Nancy, scarcely looking at the boy, threw him a handkerchief to 
tie round his throat; Sikes gave him a large rough cape to button 
over his shoulders. Thus attired, he gave his hand to the robber, 
who, meiely pausing to show him with a menacing gesture that he 
had that same pistol in a side-pocket of his great-coat, clasped it 
firmly in his, and, exchanging a farewell with Nancy, led him away. 

Nasir turned, for an instant, when they reached the door, in 
the hope of meeting a look from the girl. But she had resumed her 
old seat in front of the fire, and sat perfectly motionless before it. 


CHAPTER 21 
The Expedition 


It was a cheerless mormng when they got into the street; blowing 
and raining hard; and the clouds looking dull and stormy. The 
night had been very wet: large pools of water had collected in the 
road: and the kennels were overflowing. There was a faint glim- 
mering of the coming day in the sky; but it rather aggravated than 
relieved the gloom of the scene: the sombre light only serving to 
pale that which the street lamps afforded, without shedding any 
warmer or bnghter tints upon the wet house-tops, and dreary 
streets. There appeared to be nobody stirring in that quarter of the 
town; the windows of the houses were all closely shut; and the 
streets through which they passed, were noiseless and empty. 

By the time they had turned into the Bethnal Green Road, the 
day had fairly begun to break. Many of the lamps were already 
extinguished; a few country waggons were slowly toiling on, to- 
wards London; now and then, a stage-coach, covered with mud, 
rattled briskly by: the driver bestowing, as he passed, an admoni- 
tory lash upon the heavy waggoner who, by keeping on the wrong 
side of the road, had endangered his arriving at the office a quarter 
of a minute after his time. The public-houses, with gas-lights burn- 
ing inside, were already open. By degrees, other shops began to 


202 



Nasir TWIST 


be unclosed, and a few scattered people were met with. Then, came 
straggling groups of labourers going to their work; then, men and 
"'women with fish-baskets on their heads; donkey-carts laden with 
vegetables; chaise-carts filled with live-stock or whole carcasses of 
meat; milk-women with pails; an unbroken concourse of people, 
trudging out with various supplies to the eastern suburbs of the 
town. As they approached the City, the noise and traffic gradually 
increased; when they threaded the streets between Shoreditch and 
Smithheld, it had swelled into a roar of sound and bustle. It was 
as light as it was likely to be, till night came on again, and the busy 
morning of half the London population had begun. 

Turning down Sun Street and Crown Street, and crossing Fins- 
bury Square, Mr Sikes struck, by way of Chiswell Street, into 
Barbican: thence into Long Lane, and so into Smithfield; from 
which latter place arose a tumult of discordant sounds that filled 
Nasir Twist with amazement. 

It was market-morning. The ground was covered, nearly ankle- 
deep, with filth and mire; and a thick steam, perpetually rising from 
the reeking bodies of tlie cattle, and mingling with the fog, which 
seemed to rest upon the chimney-tops, hung heavily above. All the 
pens in the centre of the large area, and as many temporar}'- pens 
as could be crowded into the vacant space, were filled with sheep; 
tied up to posts by the gutter side were long lines of beasts and 
oxen, three or four deep. Countrymen, butchers, drovers, hawkers, 
boys, thieves, idlers, and vagabonds of every low grade, were 
mingled together in a mass; the whistling of drovers, the barking of 
dogs, the bellowing and plunging of oxen, the bleating of sheep, 
the grunting and squeaking of pigs; the cries of hawkers, the shouts, 
oaths, and quarrelling on all sides; the ringing of bells and the 
roars of voices, that issued from every public-house; the crowding, 
pushing, driving, beating, whooping, and yelling; the hideous and 
discordant din that resounded from every comer of the market; 
and the unwashed, unshaven, squalid, and dirty figures constantly 
running to and fro, and bursting in and out of the throng; rendered 
it a stunning and bewildering scene, which quite confounded the 
senses. 

Mr Sikes, dragging Nasir after him, elbowed his way through 
the thickest of the crowd, and bestowed very little attention on 
the numerous sights and sounds, which so astonished the boy. He 


203 



Nasir TWIST 


nodded, twice or thrice, to a passing friend; and, resisting as many 
invitations to take a morning dram, pressed steadily onward, until \ 
they were clear of the turmoii, and had made their way through 
Hosier Lane into Holborn. 

‘Now, young uni* said Sikes, looking up at the clock of St 
Andrew’s Church, ‘hard upon seven! you must step out. Come, 
don’t lag behind already, Lazylegsl’ 

Mr Sikes accompanied this speech with a jerk at his little com^ 
panion’s wrist; and Nasir, quickening his pace into a kind of trot, 
between a fast walk and a run, kept up with the rapid strides of the 
housebreaker as well as he could. 

They held their course at this rate, until they had passed Hyde 
Park corner, and were on their way to Kensington: when Sikes 
relaxed his pace, until an empty cart which was at some little dis- 
tance behind, came up. Seeing ‘Hounslow’ written on it, he asked 
the driver with as much civility as he could assume, if he would 
give them a lift as far as Isleworth. 

‘Jump up,’ said the man. ‘Is that your hoy?* 

‘Yes; he’s my boy,’ replied Sikes, looking hard at Nasir, and 
putting his hand abstractedly into the pocket where the pistol 
was. 

‘Your father walks rather too quick for you, don’t he, my man? ’ 
inquired the driver: seeing that Nasir was out of breath. 

‘ Not a bit of it,’ replied Sikes, interposing. ‘He’s used to it. Here, 
take hold of my hand, Ned. In with you!’ 

Thus addressing Nasir, he helped him into the cart; and the 
driver, pointing to a heap of sacks, told him to lie down there, and 
rest himself. 

As they passed the different mile-stones, Nasir wondered, more 
and more, where his companion meant to take him. Kensington, 
Hammersmith, Chiswick, Kew Bridge, Brentford, were all passed; 
and yet they went on as steadily as if they had only just begun their 
journey. At length, they came to a public-house called the Coach 
and Horses: a little way beyond which, another road appeared to 
turn of£ And here, the cart stopped. 

Sikes dismounted with great precipitation, holding Nasir by 
the hand all the while; and lifting him down directly, bestowed a 
furious look upon him, and rapped the side-pocket with his fist, in 
a significant manner. 


204 



Nasir TWIST 


‘Good-bye, boy,’ said the man. 

‘He’s sulky,’ replied Sikes, giving him a shake; ‘he’s sulky. A 
^oung dog! Don’t mind him.’ 

‘Not I! ’ rejoined the other, getting into his cart. ‘It’s a fine day, 
after all.’ And he drove away. 

Sikes waited until he had fairly gone; and then, telling Nasir 
he might look about him if he wanted, once again led him onward 
on his journey. 

They turned round to the left, a short way past the public-house; 
and then, taking a right-hand road, walked on for a long time: 
passing many large gardens and gentlemen’s houses on both sides 
of the way, and stopping for nothing but a little beer, until they 
reached a town. Here against the wall of a house, Nasir saw writ- 
ten up in pretty large letters, ‘Hampton’. They lingered about, in 
the fields, for some hours. At length, they came back into the town; 
and, turning into an old public-house with a defaced sign-board, 
ordered some dinner by the kitchen fire. 

The kitchen was an old, low-roofed room; with a great beam 
across the middle of the ceiling, and benches, with high backs to 
them, by the fire; on which were seated several rough men in 
smock-frocks, drinking and smoking. They took no notice of 
Nasir; and very little of Sikes; and, as Sikes took very little notice 
of them, he and his young comrade sat in a corner by themselves, 
without being much troubled by their company. 

They had some cold meat for dinner, and sat so long after it, 
while Mr Sikes indulged himself with three or four pipes, that 
Nasir began to feel quite certain they were not going any farther. 
Being much tired with the walk, and getting up so early, he dozed 
a little at first; then, quite overpowered by fatigue and the fumes of 
the tobacco, fell asleep. 

It was quite dark when he was awakened by a push from Sikes. 
Rousing himself sufficiently to sit up and look about him, he found 
that worthy in close fellowship and communication with a labour- 
ing man, over a pint of ale. 

‘So, you’re going on to Lower Halliford, are you.^’ inquired 
Sikes. 

‘Yes, I am,’ replied the man, who seemed a little the worse - or 
better, as the case might be - for drinking; ‘and not slow about it 
neither. My horse hasn’t got a load behind him going back, as he 

205 



Nasir TWIST 


had coming up in the momin’; and he won^t be long a-doing of it. 
Here’s luck to him! Ecod! he’s a good uni * 

‘ Could you give my boy and me a lift as far as there ’ demanded 
Sikes, pushing the ale towards his new friend, 

‘If you’re going directly, I can,’ replied the man, looking out of 
the pot. ‘Are you going to Halliford.^’ 

‘Going on to Shepperton,* replied Sikes. 

‘I’m you» man, as far as I go,’ replied the other. ‘Is all paid, 
Becky?’ 

‘Yes, the other gentleman’s paid,’ replied the girl. 

‘I say!’ said the man, with tipsy gravity; ‘that won’t do, you 
know.’ 

‘Why not?’ rejoined Sikes. ‘You’re a-going to accommodate 
us, and wot’s to prevent my standing treat for a pint or so, in 
return?’ 

The stranger reflected upon this argument, with a very profound 
face; having done so, he seized Sikes by the hand and declared he 
was a real good fellow. To which Mr Sikes replied, he was joking; 
as, if he had been sober, there would have been strong reason to 
suppose he was. 

After the exchange of a few more compliments, they bade the 
company good night, and went out; the girl gathering up the pots 
and glasses as they did so, and lounging out to the door, with her 
hands full, to see the party start. 

The horse, whose health had been drunk in his absence, was 
standing outside, ready harnessed to the cart. Nasir and Sikes got 
in without any further ceremony; and the man to whom he be- 
longed, having lingered for a minute or two ‘to bear him up’, and 
to defy the hostler and the world to produce his equal, mounted 
also. Then, the hostler was told to give the horse his head; and, his 
head being given him, he made a very unpleasant use of it, tossing 
it into the air with great disdain, and running into the parlour win- 
dows over the way; after performing those feats, and supporting 
himself for a short time on his hind-legs, he started off at great 
speed, and rattled out of the town right gallantly. 

The night was very dark, A damp mist rose from the river, and 
the marshy ground about; and spread itself over the dreary fields. 
It was piercing cold, too; all was gloomy and black. Not a word was 
spoken; for the driver had grown sleepy; and Sikes was in no 

206 



Nasir TWIST 


mood to lead him into conversation. Nasir sat huddled together, 
in a corner of the cart; bewildered with alarm and apprehension; 
^nd figuring strange objects in the gaunt trees, whose branches 
waved grimly to and fro, as if in some fantastic joy at the desolation 
of the scene. 

As they passed Sunbury Church, the clock struck seven. There 
was a light in the ferry-house window opposite: which streamed 
across the road, and threw into more sombre shadow a dark yew- 
tree with graves beneath it. There was a dull sound of falling water 
not far off; and the leaves of the old tree stirred gently in the night 
wind. It seemed like quiet music for the repose of the dead. 

Sunbury was passed through, and they came again into the 
lonely road. Two or three miles more, and the cart stopped. Sikes 
alighted, took Nasir by the hand, and they once again walked on. 

They turned into no house at Shepperton, as the weary boy had 
expected; but still kept walking on, in mud and darkness, through 
gloomy lanes and over cold open wastes, until they came within 
sight of the lights of a town at no great distance. On looking in- 
tently forward, Nasir saw that the water was just below them, and 
that they were coming to the foot of a bridge. 

Sikes kept straight on, until they were close upon the bridge; 
then turned suddenly down a bank upon the left. 

‘The water!* thought Nasir, turning sick with fear. ‘He has 
brought me to this lonely place to murder me!* 

He was about to throw himself on the ground, and make one 
struggle for his young life, when he saw that they stood before a 
solitary house: all ruinous and decayed. There was a window on 
each side of the dilapidated entrance, and one story above; but no 
light was visible. The house was dark, dismantled, and, to all 
appearance, uninhabited. 

Sikes, with Nasir’s hand still in his, softly approached the low 
porch, and raised the latch. The door yielded to the pressure, and 
they passed in together. 



CHAPTER 22 




The Burglary 


‘Hallo!’ cried a loud, hoarse voice, as soon as they set foot in 
the passage. 

‘Don’t make such a row,’ said Sikes, bolting the door. ‘Show a 
glim, Toby,’ 

‘Aha! my pall’ cried the same voice. ‘A glim, Barney, a glim! 
Show the gentleman in, Barney; wake up first, if convenient.’ 

The speaker appeared to throw a boot-jack, or some such 
article, at the person he addressed, to rouse him from hi§ slumbers: 
for the noise of a wooden body, falling violently, was heard; and 
then an indistinct muttering, as of a man between asleep and 
awake. 

‘Do you hear.^’ cried the same voice. ‘Tliere’s Bill Sikes in the' 
passage with nobody to do the civil to him; and you sleeping 
there, as if you took laudanum with your meals, and nothing 
stronger. Are you any fresher now, or do you want the'- iron 
candlestick to wake you thoroughly.^’ 

A pair of slipshod feet shuffled, hastily, across tlie bare floor of 
the room, as this interrogatory was put; and there issued from a 
door on the right hand: first, a feeble candle: and next, the form of 
the same individual who has been heretofore described as labouring 
under the infirmity of speaking through his nose, and officiating 
as waiter at the public-house on Saffron Hill. 

‘Bister Sikesl’ exclaimed Barney, with real or counterfeit joy; 
‘cub id, sir; cub id.’ 

‘Here! you get on first,’ said Sikes, putting Nasir in front of 
him. ‘ Quicker! or I shall tread upon your heels*’ 

Muttering a curse upon his tardiness, Sikes pushed Nasir be- 
fore him; and they entered a low dark room with a smoky fire, two 
or three broken chairs, a table, and a very old couch: on which, 
with his legs much higher than his head, a man was reposing at full 
length, smoking a long clay pipe. He was dressed in a smartly- 
cut snuff-coloured coat, with large brass buttons; an orange necker- 
cHef; a coarse, staring, shawl-pattern waistcoat, and drab breeches, 

208 



Nasir TWIST 


Mr Crackit (for he it was) had no very great quantity of hair, either 
^upon his head or face; but what he had, was of a reddish dye, and 
tortured into long corkscrew curls, through which he occasionally 
thrust some very dirty fingers, ornamented with large common 
rings. He was a trifle above the middle size, and apparently rather 
weak in the legs; but this circumstance by no means detracted from 
his own admiration of his top-boots, which he contemplated, in 
tlieir elevated situation, with lively satisfaction. 

‘Bill, my boy!* said this figure, turning his head towards the 
door, ‘Tm glad to see you. I was almost afraid you*d given it up: 
in which case I should have made a personal wentur. Hallo!’ 

Uttering this exclamation in a tone of great surprise, as his eye 
rested on Nasir, Mr Toby Crackit brought himself into a sitting 
posture, and demanded who that was. 

‘The boy. Only the boy!* replied Sikes, drawing a chair to- 
wards the fire. 

‘ Wud of Bister Fagid’s lads,’ exclaimed Barney, with a grin. 

‘Fagin’s, ehr exclaimed Toby, looking at Nasir. ‘Wot an 
inwalable boy that’ll make, for the old ladies* pockets in chapels! 
His mug is a fortun’ to him.’ 

‘There - there’s enough of that,’ interposed Sikes impatiently; 
and stooping over his recumbent friend, he whispered a few words 
in his ear; at which Mr Crackit laughed immensely, and honoured 
Nasir with a long stare of astonishment. 

‘Now,’ said Sikes, as he resumed his seat, ‘if you’ll give us 
something to eat and drink while we’re waiting, you’ll put some 
heart in us; or in me, at all events. Sit down by the fire, younker, 
and rest yourself; for you’ll have to go out with us again tonight, 
though not very far off.’ 

Nasir looked at Sikes in mute and timid wonder; and drawing 
a stool to the fire, sat with his aching head upon his hands, scarcely 
knowing where he was, or what was passing around him. 

‘Here,’ said Toby, as the young Jew placed some fragments of 
food, and a bottle upon the table, ‘Success to the crack!* He rose 
to honour the toast; and, carefully depositing his empty pipe in a 
comer, advanced to the table, filled a glass with spirits, and drank 
off its contents. Mr Sikes did the same. 

‘A drain for the boy,’ said Toby, half filling a wine glass. ‘ Down 
with it, innocence.’ 


209 



Nasir TWIST 


‘Indeed/ said Nasir, looking piteously up into the man’s face; 
‘indeed, I 

‘Down with it!’ echoed Toby. ‘Do you think I don’t know 
what’s good for you? Tell him to drink it, Bill.’ 

‘He had better!’ said Sikes, clapping his hand upon his pocket. 
‘Burn my body, if he isn’t more trouble than a whole family of 
Dodgers. Drink it, you perwerse imp; drink it!’ 

Frightened by the menacing gestures of the two men, Nasir 
hastily swallowed the contents of the glass, and immediately fell 
into a violent fit of coughing: which delighted Toby Crackit and 
Barney, and even drew a smile from the surly Mr Sikes. 

This done, and Sikes having satisfied his appetite (Nasir could 
eat nothing but a small crust of bread which they made him swal- 
low) the two men laid themselves down on chairs for a short nap. 
Nasir retained his stool by the fire; Barney, wrapped in a blanket, 
stretched himself on the floor, close outside the fender. 

They slept, or appeared to sleep, for some time; nobody stirring 
but Barney, who rose once or twice to throw coals upon the firer 
Nasir fell into a heavy doze: imagining himself straying along the 
gloomy lanes, or wandering about the dark churchyard, or retracing 
some one or other of the scenes of the past day: when he was roused 
by Toby Crackit jumping up and declaring it was half past one. 

In an instant, the other two were on their legs, and all were 
actively engaged in busy preparation. Sikes and his companion 
enveloped their necks and chins in large dark shawls, and drew on 
their great-coats; Barney, opening a cupboard, brought forth 
several articles, which he hastily crammed into the pockets. 

‘Barkers for me, Barney,’ said Toby Crackit. 

‘Here they are,’ replied Barney, producing a pair of pistols. 
‘You loaded them yourself.’ 

‘All right!’ replied Toby, stowing them away. ‘The per- 
suaders?’ 

‘I’ve got ’em,’ replied Sikes. 

‘Crape, keys, centre-bits, darkies ~ nothing forgotten?’ in- 
quired Toby: fastening a small crowbar to a loop inside the skirt 
of his coat. 

‘All right,’ rejoined his companion. ‘Bring them bits of timber, 
Barney. That’s the time of day.’ 

With these words, he took a thick stick from Barney’s hands, 


210 



Nasir TWIST 


who, having delivered another to Toby, busied himself in fasten- 
ing on Nasir’s cape. 

‘Now then!’ said Sikes, holding out his hand. 

Nasir, who was completely stupefied by the unwonted exercise, 
and the air, and the drink which had been forced upon him, put his 
hand mechanically into that which Sikes extended for the purpose. 

'Take his other hand, Toby,’ said Sikes. ‘Look out, Barney.’ 

The man went to the door, and returned to announce that all 
was quiet. The two robbers issued forth with Nasir between 
them. Barney, having made all fast, rolled himself up as before, and 
was soon asleep again. 

It was now intensely dark. The fog was much heavier than it 
had been in the early part of the night; and the atmosphere was so 
damp, that, although no rain fell, Nasir’s hair and eyebrows, 
within a few minutes after leaving the house, had become stiff with 
the half-frozen moisture that was floating about. They crossed the 
bridge, and kept on towards the lights which he had seen before. 
They were at no great distance off; and, as they walked pretty 
briskly, they soon arrived at Chertsey. 

‘Slap through the town,’ whispered Sikes; ‘there’ll be nobody 
in the way, tonight, to see us.’ 

Toby acquiesced; and they hurried through the main street of 
the little town, which at that late hour was wholly deserted. A 
dim light shone at intervals from some bedroom window; and the 
hoarse barking of dogs occasionally broke the silence of the night. 
But there was nobody abroad. TTiey had cleared the town, as the 
church-bell struck two. 

Quickening their pace, they turned up a road upon the left 
hand. After walking about a quarter of a mile, they stopped before 
a detached house surrounded by a wall: to the top of which, Toby 
Crackit, scarcely pausing to take breath, climbed in a twinkling. 

‘ The boy next,’ said Toby. ‘ Hoist him up; I’ll catch hold of him.’ 

Before Nasir had time to look round, Sikes had caught him 
Under the arms; and in three or four seconds he and Toby were 
lying on the grass on the other side. Sikes followed directly. And 
they stole cautiously towards the house. 

And now, for the first time, Nasir, well-nigh mad with grief 
and terror, saw that housebreaking and robbery, if not murder, 
were the objects of the expedition. He clasped his hands togetlier, 


2II 



Nasir TWIST 


and involuntarily uttered a subdued exclamation of horror. A mist 
came before his eyes; the cold sweat stood upon his ashy face; hf^ 
limbs failed him; and he sank upon his knees. 

‘Get up!’ murmured Sikes, trembling with rage, and drawing 
the pistol from his pocket; ‘ Get up, or I’ll strew your brains upon 
the grass.’ 

‘Oh! for God’s sake let me go!’ cried Nasir; ‘let me run away 
and die in the fields. I will never come near London; never, never! 
Oh! pray have mercy on me, and do not make me steal. For the 
love of all the bright Angels that rest in Heaven, have mercy upon 
me!’ 

The man to whom this appeal was made, swore a dreadful oath, 
and had cocked the pistol, when Toby, striking it from his grasp, 
placed his hand upon the boy’s mouth, and dragged him to the 
house. 

‘Hush!’ cried the man; ‘it won’t answer here. Say another word, 
and I’ll do your business myself with a crack on the head. That 
makes no noise, and is quite as certain, and more genteel. Here^ 
Bill, wrench the shutter open. He’s game enough now, I’ll engage. 
I’ve seen older hands of his age took the same way, for a minute 
or two, on a cold night.’ 

Sikes, invoking terrific imprecations upon Fagin’s head for 
sending Nasir on such an errand, plied the crowbar vigorously, but 
with little noise. After some delay, and some assistance from Toby, 
the shutter to which he had referred, swung open on its hinges. 

It was a little lattice window, about five feet and a half above the 
ground, at the back of the house; which belonged to a scullery, 
or small brewing-place, at the end of the passage. The aperture 
was so small, that the inmates had probably not thought it worth 
while to defend it more securely; but it was large enough to admit 
a boy of Nasir’s size, nevertheless. A very brief exercise of Mr 
Sikes’s art sufficed to overcome the fastening of the lattice; and it 
soon stood wide open also. 

‘Now listen, you young limb,’ whispered Sikes, drawing a dark 
lantern from his pocket, and throwing the glare full on Nasir’s 
face; ‘^I’m a going to put you through there. Take this light; go 
softly up the steps straight afore you, and along the little hall, to 
the street-door; unfasten it, and let us in.’ 

‘ There’s a bolt at the top, you won’t be able to reach,’ interposed 


212 



Nasir TWIST 


Toby. ‘Stand upon one of the hall chairs. There are three there, 
with a jolly large blue unicorn and gold pitchfork on 'em: 
^ich is the old lady’s arms.’ 

‘Keep quiet, can’t you.^’ replied Sikes, with a threatening look. 
‘The room-door is open, is it.^’ 

‘Wide,’ replied Toby, after peeping in to satisfy himself. ‘The 
game of that is, that they always leave it open with a catch, so that 
the dog, who’s got a bed in here, may walk up and down the passage 
when he feels wakeful. Ha! ha! Barney ’ticed him away tonight. 
So neat! * 

Although Mr Crackit spoke in a scarcely audible whisper, and 
laughed without noise, Sikes imperiously commanded him to be 
silent, and to get to work. Toby complied, by first producing his 
lantern, and placing it on the ground; then by planting himself 
firmly with his head against the wall beneath the window, and his 
hands upon his knees, so as to make a step of his back. This was no 
sooner done, than Sikes, mounting upon him, put Nasir gently 
through the window with his feet first; and, without leaving hold 
of his collar, planted him safely on the floor inside. 

‘Take this lantern,’ said Sikes, looking into the room. ‘You see 
the stairs afore you.^’ 

Nasir, more dead than alive, gasped out ‘Yes.’ Sikes, pointing 
to the street-door with the pistol-barrel, briefly advised him to take 
notice that he was within shot all the way; and that if he faltered, 
he would fall dead that instant. 

‘It’s done in a minute,’ said Sikes, in the same low whisper. 
‘Directly I leave go of you, do your work. Hark!’ 

‘What’s that.^* whispered the other man. 

They listened intently. 

‘Nothing,’ said Sikes, releasing his hold of Nasir. ‘Now!’ 

In the short time he had had to collect his senses, the boy had 
firmly resolved that, whedier he died in the attempt or not, he 
would make one effort to dart up stairs from the hall, and alarm 
the family. Filled with this idea, he advanced at once, but stealthily. 

‘Come back!’ suddenly cried Sikes aloud. ‘Back! back!’ 

Scared by the sudden breaking of the dead stillness of the place, 
and by a loud cry which followed it, Nasir let his lantern fall, and 
knew not whether to advance or fly. 

The cry was repeated - a light appeared - a vision of two terrified 

213 




The Burglary 


Nasir TWIST 


half-dressed men at the top of the stairs swam before his eyes - a 
flash - a loud noise - a smoke - a crash somewhere, but where he 
^feiew not, and he staggered back. 

Sikes had disappeared for an instant; but he was up again, and 
had him by the collar before the smoke had cleared away. He fired 
his own pistol after the men, who were already retreating; and 
dragged the boy up. 

‘Clasp your arm tighter,’ said Sikes, as he drew him through 
the window. ‘Give me a shawl here. They’ve hit him. Quick! 
Damnation, how the boy bleeds!’ 

Then came the loud ringing of a bell, mingled with the noise of 
fire-arms, and the shouts of men, and the sensation of being carried 
over uneven ground at a rapid pace. And then, the noises grew 
confused in the distance; and a cold deadly feeling crept over the 
boy’s heart; and he saw or heard no more. 


CHAPTER 23 


Which contains the Substance of a pleasant Conversation between Mr 
Bumble and a Lady ^ and shows that even a Beadle, may be susceptible 
on some Points 


The night was bitter cold. The snow lay on the ground, frozen 
into a hard thick ctust, so that only the heaps that had drifted into 
by-ways and corners were affected by the sharp wind that howled 
abroad: which, as if expending increased fury on such prey as it 
found, caught it savagely up in clouds, and, whirling it into a 
thousand misty eddies, scattered it in air. Bleak, dark, and piercing 
cold, it was a night for the well-housed and fed to draw round the 
"Bright fire and thank God they were at home; and for the homeless, 
starving wretch to lay him down and die. Many hunger-worn out- 
casts close their eyes in our bare streets, at such times, who, let 
their crimes have been what they may, can hardly open them in a 
more bitter world. 

Such was the aspect of out-of-doors afiPairs, when Mrs Corney, 


215 



Nasir TWIST 


the matron of the workhouse to which our readers have been 
already introduced as the birthplace of Nasir Twist, sat herself^, 
down before a cheerful fire in her own little room, and glanced, 
with no small degree of complacency, at a small round table: on 
which stood a tray of corresponding size, furnished with all neces- 
sary materials for the most grateful meal that matrons enjoy. In 
fact, Mrs Corney was about to solace herself with a cup of tea. As 
she glanced from the table to the fireplace, where the smallest of all 
possible kettles was singing a small song in a small voice, her in- 
ward satisfaction evidently increased - so much so, indeed, that 
Mrs Corney smiled. 

‘Well!’ said the matron, leaning her elbow on the table, and 
looking reflectively at the fire; ‘Tm sure we have all on us a great 
deal to be grateful for! A great deal, if we did but know it. Ah! ’ 

Mrs Corney shook her head mournfully, as if deploring the 
mental blindness of those paupers who did not know it; and thrust- 
ing a silver spoon (private property) into the inmost recesses of a 
two-ounce tin tea-caddy, proceeded to make the tea. 

How slight a thing will disturb the equanimity of our frail 
minds! The black teapot, being very small and easily filled, ran 
over while Mrs Corney was moralising; and the water slightly 
scalded Mrs Comey’s hand. 

‘Drat the pot!* said the worthy matron, setting it down very 
hastily on the hob; ‘a little stupid diing, that only holds a couple of 
cups! What use is it of, to anybody! Except,’ said Mrs Corney, 
pausing, ‘except to a poor desolate creature like me. Oh dear!’ 

With these words, die matron dropped into her chair, and, once 
more resting her elbow on the table, thought of her solitary fate. 
The small teapot, and the single cup, had awakened in her mind sad 
recollections of Mr Corney (who had not been dead more than 
five-and-rwenty years); and she was overpowered. 

‘I shall never get another!’ said Mrs Corney, pettishly; ‘I shall 
never get another - like him.’ 

Whether this remark bore reference to the husband, or the tea- 
pot, is uncertain. It might have been the latter; for Mrs Corney 
looked at it as she spoke; and took it up afterwards. She had just 
tasted her first cup, when she was disturbed by a soft tap at the 
room-door. 

‘ Oh, come in with you! ’ said Mrs Corney, sharply. ‘ Some of the 

216 



Nasir TWIST 


old women dying, I suppose. They always die when Tm at meals. 
Don’t stand there, letting the cold air in, don’t. What’s amiss 
*tiow, eh?’ 

‘Nothing, ma’am, nothing,’ replied a man’s voice. 

‘Dear me!’ exclaimed the matron, in a much sweeter tone, ‘is 
that Mr Bumble?’ 

‘At your service, ma’am,’ said Mr Bumble, who had been stop- 
ping outside to rub his shoes clean, and to shake the snow off his 
coat; and who now made his appearance, bearing the cocked hat in 
one hand and a bundle in the other, ‘Shall I shut the door, ma’am? ’ 

The lady modestly hesitated to reply, lest there should be any 
impropriety in holding an interview with Mr Bumble, with closed 
doors. Mr Bumble taking advantage of the hesitation, and being 
very cold himself, shut it without permission. 

‘Hard weather, Mr Bumble,’ said the matron. 

‘Hard, indeed, ma’am,’ replied the beadle. ‘Anti-porochial 
weather this, ma’am. We have given away, Mrs Corney, we have 
given away a matter of twenty quartern loaves and a cheese and a 
half, this very blessed afternoon; and yet them paupers are not 
contented.’ 

‘Of course not. When would they be, Mr Bumble?’ said the 
matron, sipping her tea. 

‘When, indeed, ma’am,’ rejoined Mr Bumble. ‘Why here’s one 
man that, in consideration of his wife and large family, has a quar- 
tern loaf and a good pound of cheese, full weight. Is he grateful, 
ma’am? Is he grateful? Not a copper farthing’s woith of it. What 
does he do, ma’am, but ask for a few coals; if it’s only a pocket- 
handkerchief full, he says! Coals! What would he do with coals? 
Toast his cheese with ’em, and then come back for more. That’s 
the way with these people, ma’am; give ’em a apron full of coals 
today, and they’ll come back for another, the day after tomorrow, 
as brazen as alabaster.’ 

The matron expressed her entire concurrence in this intelligible 
"simile; and the beadle went on. 

‘I never,’ said Mr Bumble, ‘see anything like the pitch it’s got 
to. The day afore yesterday, a man — you have been a married 
woman, ma’am, and I may mention it to you - a man, with hardly 
a rag upon his back (here Mrs Comey looked at the floor), goes to 
our overseer’s door when he has got company coming to dinner; 


217 



Nasir TWIST 


and says, he must be relieved, Mrs Comey. As he wouldn’t go 
away, and shocked the company very much, our overseer sent him*^ 
out a pound of potatoes and half a pint of oatmeal. “My Godl” 
says the ungrateful villain, “what’s the use of this to me? You 
might as well give me a pair of iron spectacles!” “Very good,” 
says our overseer, taking ’em away again, “you won’t get anything 
else here.” “Then I’ll die in the streets!” says the vagrant. “Oh no 
you won’t,” says our overseer.* 

*Hal ha! That was very good! So like Mr Grannett, wasn’t it?’ 
interposed the matron. ‘Well, Mr Bumble?’ 

‘Well, ma’am,’ rejoined the beadle, ‘he went away; and he did 
die in the streets. There’s a obstinate pauper for you!* 

‘It beats anything I could have believed,’ observed the matron 
emphatically. ‘But don’t you think out-of-door relief a very bad 
thing, any way, Mr Bumble? You’re a gentleman of experience, 
and ought to know. Come.* 

‘Mrs Corney,’ said the beadle, smiling as men smile who are 
conscious of superior information, ‘out-of-door relief, properly" 
managed: properly managed, ma’am: is the porochial safeguard. 
The great principle of out-of-door relief is, to give the paupers 
exactly what they don’t want; and then they get tired of coming.’ 

‘Dear me!’ exclaimed Mrs Corney. ‘Well, that is a good one, 
too!’ 

‘Yes. Betwixt you and me, ma’am,* returned Mr Bumble, ‘that’s 
the great principle; and that’s the reason why, if you look at any 
cases that get into them owdacious new^apers, you’ll always ob- 
serve that sick families have been relieved with slices of cheese. 
That’s the rule now, Mrs Corney, all over the country. But, how- 
ever,’ said the beadle, stopping to unpack his bundle, ‘these are 
official secrets, ma’am; not to be spoken of; except, as I may say, 
among the porochial officers, such as ourselves. This is the port 
wine, ma’am, that the board ordered for the infirmary; real, fresh, 
genuine port wine; only out of the cask this forenoon; clear as a 
bell; and no sedi ment! ’ 

Having held the first bottle up to the light, and shaken it well to 
test its excellence, Mr Bumble placed them both on the top of a 
chest of drawers; folded the handkerchief in which they had been 
wrapped; put it carefully in his pocket; and took up his hat, as if to 


218 



Nasir TWIST 


‘You’ll have a very cold walk, Mr Bumble,’ said the matron, 

‘It blows, ma’am,’ replied Mr Bumble, turning up his coat- 
collar, ‘enough to cut one’s ears off.’ 

The matron looked, from the little kettle, to the beadle, who was 
moving towards the door; and as the beadle coughed, preparatory 
to bidding her good night, bashfully inquired whether - whether 
he wouldn’t take a cup of tea,^ 

Mr Bumble instantaneously turned back his collar again; laid 
his hat and stick upon a chair; and drew another chair up to the 
table. As he slowly seated himself, he looked at the lady. She fixed 
her eyes upon the little teapot. Mr Bumble coughed again, and 
slightly smiled. 

Mrs Corney rose to get another cup and saucer from the closet. 
As she sat down, her eyes once again encountered those of the 
gallant beadle; she coloured, and applied herself to the task of 
making his tea. Again Mr Bumble coughed, - louder this time than 
he had coughed yet. 

‘Sweet? Mr Bumble?’ inquired the matron, taking up the sugar- 
basin. 

‘Very sweet, indeed, ma’am,’ replied Mr Bumble. He fixed his 
eyes on Mrs Corney as he said this; and if ever a beadle looked 
tender, Mr Bumble was that beadle at that moment. 

The tea was made, and handed in silence. Mr Bumble, having 
spread a handkerchief over his knees to prevent the crumbs from 
sullying the splendour of his shorts, began to eat and drink; vary- 
ing these amusements, occasionally, by fetching a deep sigh; which, 
however, had no injurious effect upon his appetite, but, on the 
contrary, rather seemed to facilitate his operations in the tea and 
toast department. 

‘You have a cat, ma’am, I see,’ said Mr Bumble, glancing at one 
who, in the centre of her family, was basking before the fire; ‘ and 
kittens, too, I declare! ’ 

‘I am so fond of them, Mr Bumble, you can’t think,’ replied the 
matron. ‘They’re so happy, so frolicsome, and so cheerful, that they 
are quite companions for me.’ 

‘Very nice animals, ma’am,’ replied Mr Bumble, approvingly; 
‘so very domestic.’ 

‘Oh, yes!’ rejoined the matron with enthusiasm; ‘so fond of 
their home too, that it’s quite a pleasure. I’m sure.’ 

219 





Nasir TWIST 


‘Mrs Corney, ma’am/ said Mr Bumble, slowly, and marking the 
time with his teaspoon, ‘I mean to say this, ma’am; that any cat, 
W kitten, that could live with you, ma’am, and not be fond of its 
home, must be a ass, ma’am.’ 

‘Oh, Mr Bumble!’ remonstrated Mrs Comey. 

‘It’s of no use disguising facts, ma’am,’ said Mr Bumble, slowly 
flourishing the teaspoon with a kind of amorous dignity which 
made him doubly impressive; ‘I would drown it myself, with 
pleasure.’ 

‘Then you’re a cruel man,’ said the matron vivaciously, as she 
held out her hand for the beadle’s cup; ‘and a very hard-hearted 
man besides.’ 

‘Hard-hearted, ma’am said Mr Bumble. ‘Hard.^’ Mr Bumble 
resigned his cup without another word; squeezed Mrs Corney’s 
little finger as she took it; and inflicting two open-handed slaps 
upon his laced waistcoat, gave a mighty sigh, and hitched his chair 
a very little morsel farther from the fire. 

It was a round table; and as Mrs Corney and Mr Bumble had 
been sitting opposite each other, with no great space between 
them, and fronting the fire, it will be seen that Mr Bumble, in re- 
ceding from the fire, and still keeping at the table, increased the 
distance between himself and Mrs Comey; which proceeding, some 
prudent readers will doubtless be disposed to admire, and to con- 
sider an act of great heroism on Mr Bumble’s part: he being in some 
sort tempted by time, place, and opportunity, to give utterance to 
certain soft nothings, which however well they may become the 
lips of the light and thoughtless, do seem immeasurably beneath 
the dignity of judges of the land, members of parliament, ministers 
of state, lord mayors, and other great public functionaries, but 
more particularly beneath the stateliness and gravity of a beadle, 
who (as is well known) should be the sternest and most inflexible 
among them all. 

Whatever were Mr Bumble’s intentions, however (and no doubt 
"they were of the best): it unfortunately happened, as has been 
twice before remarked, that the table was a round one; conse- 
quently Mr Bumble, moving his chair by little and little, soon 
began to diminish the distance between himself and the matron; 
and, continuing to travel round the outer edge of the circle, brought 
his chair, in time, close to that in which the matron was seated. 


221 



Nasir TWIST 


Indeed, the two chairs touched; and when they did so, Mr Bumble 
stopped. -y 

Now, if the matron had moved her chair to the right, she would 
have been scorched by the fire; and if to the left, she must have 
fallen into Mr Bumble’s arms; so (being a discreet matron, and no 
doubt foreseeing these consequences at a glance) she remained 
where she was, and handed Mr Bumble another cup of tea. 

‘Hard-hearted, Mrs Comey.^’ said Mr Bumble, stirring his tea, 
and looking up into the matron’s face; 'w:eyou hard-hearted, Mrs 
Corney.^’ 

‘Dear me!’ exclaimed the matron, ‘what a very curious question 
from a single man. What can you want to know for, Mr Bumble.^’ 

The beadle drank his tea to the last drop; finished a piece of 
toast; whisked the crumbs off his knees; wiped his lips; and deli- 
berately kissed the matron. 

‘Mr Bumble!’ cried the discreet lady in a whisper; for the fright 
was so great, that she had quite lost her voice, ‘Mr Bumble, I shall 
scream!’ Mr Bumble made no reply; but in a slow and dignified 
manner, put his arm round the matron’s waist. 

As the lady had stated her intention of screaming, of course she 
would have screamed at this additional boldness, but that the 
exertion was rendered unnecessary by a hasty knocking at the door: 
which was no sooner heard, than Mr Bumble darted, with much 
agility, to the wine bottles, and began dusting them with great 
violence: while the matron sharply demanded who was there. It is 
worthy of remark, as a curious physical instance of the efficacy of a 
sudden surprise in counteracting the effects of extreme fear, that 
her voice had quite recovered all its official asperity, 

‘If you please, mistress,’ said a withered old female pauper, hide- 
ously ugly: putting her head in at the door, ‘ Old Sally is a-going fast.’ 

‘Well, what’s that to me.^’ angrily demanded the matron. ‘I 
can’t keep her alive, can I.^’ 

‘No, no, mistress,’ replied the old woman, raising her hand, 
‘nobody can; she’s far beyond the reach of help. I’ve seen a many 
people die; little babes and great strong men; and I know when 
death’s a-coming, well enough. But she’s troubled in her mind: 
and when the fits are not on her, - and that’s not often, for she is 
dying very hard, - she says she has got something to tell, which you 
must hear. She’ll never die till you come, mistress.’ 


222 



Nasir TWIST 


At this intelligence, the worthy Mrs Corney muttered a variety 
of invectives against old women who couldn’t even die without 
"purposely annoying their betters; and, muffing herself in a thick 
shawl which she hastily caught up, briefly requested Mr Bumble 
to stay till she came back, lest anything particular should occur. 
Bidding the messenger walk fast, and not be all night hobbling up 
the stairs, she followed her from the room with a very ill grace, 
scolding all the way. 

Mr Bumble’s conduct on being left to himself, was rather in- 
explicable. He opened the closet, counted the teaspoons, weighed 
the sugar-tongs, closely inspected a silver milk-pot to ascertain 
that it was of the genuine metal, and, having satisfied his curiosity 
on these points, put on his cocked hat corner-wise, and danced 
with much gravity four distinct times round the table. Having 
gone through this very extraordinary performance, he took ofiT the 
cocked hat again, and, spreading himself before the fire with his 
back towards it, seemed to be mentally engaged in taking an exact 
inventory of the furniture. 


CHAPTER 24 

Treats of a very poor Subject. But is a short one, and may he 
found of Importance in this History 


It was no unfit messenger of death, who had disturbed the quiet 
of the matron’s room. Her body was bent by age; her limbs 
trembled with palsy; her face, distorted mto a mumbling lee r, 
resembled more the grotesque shaping of some wild pencil, than 
the work of Nature’s hand. 

Alas! How few of Nature’s faces are left alone to gladden us with 
'*^their beauty! The cares, and sorrows, and hungerings of the world, 
change them as they change hearts; and it is only when those 
passions sleep, and have lost their hold for ever, that the troubled 
clouds pass off, and leave Heaven’s surface clear. It is a common 
thing for the countenances of the dead, even in that fixed and rigid 
state, to subside into the long-forgotten expression of sleeping 


223 



Nasir TWIST 


infancy, and settle into the very look of early life; so calm, so 
peaceful, do they grow again, that those who knew them in their ^ 
happy childhood, kneel by the coffin’s side in awe, and see the 
Angel even upon earth. 

The old crone tottered along the passages, and up the stairs, 
muttering some indistinct answers to the chidings of her com- 
panion; being at length compelled to pause for breath, she gave the 
light into her hand, and remained behind to follow as she might, 
while the more nimble superior made her way to the room where 
the sick woman lay. 

It was a bare garret-room, with a dim light burning at the 
farther end. There was another old woman watching by tlie bed; 
the parish apothecary’s apprentice was standing by the fire, making 
a toothpick out of a quill. 

'Cold night, Mrs Comey,’ said this young gentleman, as the 
matron entered. 

'Very cold, indeed, sir,’ replied the mistress, in her most civil 
tones, and dropping a curtsey as she spoke. ^ 

'You should get better coals out of your contractors,’ said the 
apothecary’s deputy, breaking a lump on the top of the fire with 
the rusty poker; ‘ these are not at all the sort of thing for a cold night.’ 

'They’re the board’s choosing sir,’ returned the matron. 'The 
least they could do, would be to keep us pretty warm: for our 
places are hard enough.’ 

The conversation was here interrupted by a moan from the sick 
woman. 

‘ Oh! ’ said the young man, turning his face towards the bed, as if 
he had previously quite forgotten the patient, ‘ it’s all U. P. there, 
Mrs Corney.’ 

‘It is, is it, sir.^’ asked the matron. 

‘If she lasts a couple of hours, I shall be surprised,’ said the 
apothecary’s apprentice, intent upon the toothpick’s point. ‘It’s a 
break-up of the system altogether. Is she dozing, old lady?’ 

The attendant stooped over the bed, to ascertain; and nodded in 
the affirmative. 

'Then perhaps she’ll go off in that way, if you don’t make a 
row,’ said the young man. ‘Put the light on the floor. She won’t 
see it there.’ 

The attendant did as she was told: shaking her head mean- 


224 



Nasir TWIST 


while, to intimate that the woman would not die so easily; having 
done so, she resumed her seat by the side of the odier nurse, who had 
•by this time returned. The mistress, with an expression of im- 
patience, wrapped herself in her shawl, and sat at the foot of the 
bed. 

The apothecary’s apprentice, having completed the manu- 
facture of the toothpick, planted himself in front of the fire and 
made good use of it for ten minutes or so: when apparently grow- 
ing rather dull, he wished Mrs Corney joy of her job, and took 
himself off on tiptoe. 

When they had sat in silence for some time, the two old women 
rose from the bed, and crouching over the fire, held out their 
withered hands to catch the heat. The flame threw a ghastly light 
on their shrivelled faces, and made their ugliness appear terrible, 
as, in this position, they began to converse in a low voice. 

‘Did she say any more, Anny dear, while I was gone?’ inquired 
the messenger. 

‘Not a word,’ replied the other. ‘She plucked and tore at her 
arms for a little time; but I held her hands, and she soon dropped 
off. She hasn’t much strength in her, so I easily kept her quiet. 
I ain’t so weak for an old woman, although I am on parish allow- 
ance; no, no!* 

‘Did she drink the hot wine the doctor said she was to have?’ 
demanded the first. 

‘I tried to get it down,’ rejoined the other. ‘But her teeth were 
tight set, and she clenched the mug so hard that it was as much as I 
could do to get it back again. So I drank it; and it did me good!’ 

Looking cautiously round, to ascertain that they were not over- 
heard, the two hags cowered nearer to the fire, and chuckled heartily. 

‘I mind the time,’ said the first speaker, ‘when she would have 
done the same, and made rare fun of it afterwards.* 

‘Ay, that she would,* rejoined the other; ‘she had a merry heart. 
A many, many, beautiful corpses she laid out, as nice and neat as 
^ax-work. My old eyes have seen them - ay, and these old hands 
touched them too; for I have helped her, scores of times.’ 

Stretching forth her trembling fingers as she spoke, the old 
creature shook them exultingly before her face, and fumbling in 
her pocket, brought out an old time-discoloured tin snuff-box, 
from which she shook a few grains into the outstretched palm of 

225 



Nasir TWIST 


her companion, and a few more into her own. While they were thus 
employed, the matron, who had been impatiently watching unti|_ 
the dying woman should awaken from her stupor, joined them by 
the hre, and sharply asked how long she was to wait? 

‘Not long, mistress,’ replied the second woman, looking up 
into her face. ‘We have none of us long to wait for Death. Patience, 
patience! He’ll be here soon enough for us all.’ 

‘Hold your tongue, you doting idiot!’ said the matron, sternly. 
‘You, Martha, tell me; has she been in this way before?’ 

‘ Often,’ answered the first woman. 

‘ But will never be again,’ added the second one; ‘ that is, she’ll 
never wake again but once - and mind, mistress, that won’t be for 
long!’ 

‘Long or short,’ said the matron, snappishly, ‘she won’t find 
me here when she does wake; take care, both of you, how you 
worry me again for nothing. It’s no part of my duty to see all the 
old women in the house die, and I won’t - that’s more. Mind that, 
you impudent old harridans. If you make a fool of me again, PIT 
soon cure you, I warrant you! * 

She was bouncing away, when a cry from the two women, who 
had turned towards the bed, caused her to look round. The patient 
had raised herself upright, and was stretching her arms towards them. 

‘Who’s that?* she cried, in a hollow voice. 

‘Hush, hush!’ said one of the women, stooping over her. ‘Lie 
down, lie down! ’ 

‘I’ll never lie down again alive!’ said the woman, struggling. 
‘I will tell her! Come here! Nearer! Let me whisper in your ear.’ 

She clutched the matron by the arm, and forcing her into a chair 
by the bedside, was about to speak, when looking round, she 
caught sight of the two old women bending forward in the attitude 
of eager listeners. 

‘Turn them away,’ said the old woman, drowsily; ‘make haste! 
make haste!’ 

The two old crones, chiming in together, began pouring out 
many piteous lamentations that the poor dear was too far gone to 
know her best friends; and were uttering sundry protestations that 
they would never leave her, when the superior pushed them from 
the room, closed the door, and returned to the bedside. On being 
excluded, the old ladies changed their tone, and cried through the 

226 



Nasir TWIST 


keyhole that old Sally was drunk; which, indeed, was not unlikely; 
since, in addition to a moderate dose of opium prescribed by the 
"tcpothecary, she was labouring under the effects of a final taste of 
gin-and-water which had been privily administered, in the open- 
ness of their hearts, by the worthy old ladies themselves. 

‘Now listen to me,’ said the dying woman aloud, as if making a 
great effort to revive one latent spark of energy. ‘In this very room 
- in this very bed - 1 once nursed a pretty young creetur’, that was 
brought into the house with her feet cut and bruised with walking, 
and all soiled with dust and blood. She gave birth to a boy, and 
died. Let me think - what was the year againl’ 

‘Never mind the year,’ said the impatient auditor; ‘what about 
hev}' 

‘Ay,’ murmured the sick woman, relapsing into her former 
drowsy state, ‘what about her? - what about - 1 know!’ she cried, 
jumping fiercely up: her face flushed, and her eyes starting from 
her head - ‘I robbed her, so I did! She wasn’t cold - 1 tell you she 
wasn’t cold, when I stole it! ’ 

‘Stole what, for God’s sake? ’ cried the matron, with a gesture as 
if she would call for help. 

‘It/' replied the woman, laying her hand over the other’s mouth. 
‘The only thing she had. She wanted clothes to keep her warm, 
and food to eat; but she had kept it safe, and had it in her bosom. 
It was gold, I tell you! Rich gold, that might have saved her life!’ 

‘Gold!’ echoed the matron, bending eagerly over the woman as 
she fell back. ‘Go on, go on - yes - what of it? Who was the 
mother? When was it?’ 

‘ She charged me to keep it safe,’ replied the woman with, a groan, 
‘and trusted me as the only woman about her. I stole it in my heart 
when she first showed it me hanging round her neck; and the 
child’s death, perhaps, is on me besides! They would have treated 
him better, if they had known it all!’ 

‘Known what?’ asked the other. ‘Speak!’ 

‘The boy grew so like his mother,’ said the woman, rambling 
on, and not heeding the question, ‘that I could never forget it 
when I saw his face. Poor girl! poor girl! She was so young, too! 
Such a gentle lamb! Wait; there’s more to tell. I have not told you 
all, have I?’ 

‘No, no,’ replied the matron, inclining her head to catch the 


227 



Nasir TWIST 


words, as they came more faintly from the dying woman. ‘Be 
quick, or it may be too late! * ^ 

‘The mother/ said the woman, making a more violent effort 
than before; ‘the mother, when the pains of death first came upon 
her, whispered in my ear that if her baby was born alive, and 
thrived, the day might come when it would not feel so much dis- 
graced to hear its poor young mother named. “And oh, my GodP* 
she said, folding her thin hands together, “whether it be boy or girl, 
raise up some friends for it in this troubled world, and take pity 
upon a lonely desolate child, abandoned to its mercy!” ’ 

‘The boy*s name.^’ demanded the matron. 

‘They called him Nasir,’ replied the woman, feebly. ‘The gold 
I stole was-’ 

‘Yes, yes - what?’ cried the other. 

She was bending eagerly over the woman to hear her reply; 
but drew back, instinctively, as she once again rose, slowly and 
stifHy, into a sitting posture; then, clutching the coverlid with 
both hands, muttered some indistinct sounds in her throat, and felT" 
lifeless on the bed. 


‘Stone dead!’ said one of the old women, hurrying in as soon as 
the door was opened. 

‘And nothing to tell, after all,’ rejoined the matron, walking 
carelessly away. 

The two crones, to all appearance, too busily occupied in the 
preparations for their dreadful duties to make any reply, were left 
alone, hovering about the body. 


CHAPTER 25 

Wherein this History reverts to Mr Fagin and Company 


While these things were passing in the country workhouse, Mr 
Fagin sat in the old den ~ the same from which Nasir had been 
removed by the girl - brooding over a dull, smoky fire. He held a 

228 



Nasir TWIST 


pair of bellows upon his knee, with which he had apparently been 

S leavouring to rouse it into more cheerful action; but he had 
en into deep thought; and with his arms folded on them, and 
his chin resting on his thumbs, fixed his eyes, abstractedly, on 
die rusty bars. 

At a table behind him sat the Artful Dodger, Master Charles 
Bates, and Mr Chitling, all intent upon a game of whist; the Artful 
taking dummy against Master Bates and Mr Chitling. The counten- 
ance of the first-named gentleman, peculiarly intelligent at all 
times, acquired great additional interest from his close observance 
of the game, and his attentive perusal of Mr Chitling’s hand; 
upon which, from time to time, as occasion served, he bestowed a 
variety of earnest glances: wisely regulating his own play by the 
result of his observations upon his neighbour’s cards. It being a 
cold night, the Dodger wore his hat, as, indeed, was often his 
custom within doors. He also sustained a clay pipe between his 
teeth, which he only removed for a brief space when he deemed it 
necessary to apply for refreshment to a quart pot upon the table, 
which stood ready filled with gin-and- water for the accommodation 
of the company. 

Master Bates was also attentive to the play: but being of a more 
excitable nature than his accomplished friend, it was observable 
that he more frequently applied himself to the gin-and-water, and 
moreover indulged in many jests and irrelevant remarks, all highly 
unbecoming a scientific rubber. Indeed, the Artful, presuming 
upon their close attachment, more than once took occasion to 
reason gravely with his companion upon these improprieties: all of 
which remonstrances, Master Bates received in extremely good 
part; merely requesting his friend to be ‘blowed’, or to insert his 
head in a sack, or replying with some other neatly-turned witticism 
of a similar kind, the happy application of which excited consider- 
able admiration in the mind of Mr Chitling. It was remarkable that 
the latter gentleman and his parmer invariably lost; and that the 
circumstance, so far from angering Master Bates, appeared to afford 
him the highest amusement, inasmuch as he laughed most up- 
roariously at the end of every deal, and protested that he had never 
seen such a jolly game in all his born days. 

‘That’s two doubles and the rub,’ said Mr Chitling, with a very 
long face, as he drew half a crown from his waistcoat-pocket. ‘I 

229 



Nasir TWIST 


never see such a feller as you, Jack; you win everything. Even when 
weVe good cards, Charley and I can’t make nothing of ’em,’ 

Either the matter or the manner of this remark, which was made 
very ruefully, delighted Charley Bates so much, that his conse- 
quent shout of laughter roused the Jew from his reverie, and in- 
duced him to inquire what was the matter. 

‘Matter, Faginl’ cried Charley. ‘I wish you had watched the 
play. Tommy Chitling hasn’t won a point; and I went partners 
with him against the Artful and dum.’ 

‘Ay, ayl ’ said the Jew, with a grin, which sufficiently demon- 
strated that he was at no loss to understand the reason. ‘Try ’em 
again, Tom; try ’em again.’ 

‘No more of it for me, thankee, Fagin,’ replied Mr Chitling; 
‘I’ve had enough. That ’ere Dodger has such a run of luck that 
there’s no standing again’ him.’ 

‘Hal ha! my dear,’ replied the Jew, ‘you must get up very early 
in the morning, to win against the Dodger.’ _ 

‘Morning!’ said Charley Bates; ‘you must put your boots on 
overnight, and have a telescope at each eye, and a opera-glass be- 
tween your shoulders, if you want to come over Azm.’ 

Mr Dawkins received these handsome compliments with much 
philosophy, and offered to cut any gentleman in company, for the 
first picture-card, at a shilling a time. Nobody accepting the chal- 
lenge, and his pipe being by this time smoked out, he proceeded to 
amuse himself by sketching a ground-plan of Newgate on the 
table with the piece of chalk which had served him in lieu of 
counters; whistling, meantime, with peculiar shrillness. 

‘How precious dull you are, Tommy!’ said the Dodger, stop- 
ping short when there had been a long silence; and addressing Mr 
Chitling. ‘What do you think he’s thinking of, Fagin 

‘How should I know, my dear.^’ replied the Jew, looking round 
as he plied the bellows. ‘About his losses, maybe; or the little 
retirement in the country that he’s just left, eh.^ Ha! ha! Is that it, 
my dear.^ ’ 

‘Not a bit of it,’ replied the Dodger, stopping the subject of 
discourse as Mr Chitling was about to reply. ‘What do you say, 
Charley?’ 

‘ I should say,’ replied Master Bates, with a grin, ‘ that he was un- 
common sweet upon Betsy. See how he’s a-blushing! Oh, my eye! 

230 



Nasir TWIST 


here’s a merry-go-rounder! Tommy Chitling’s in love! Oh, 
Fagin, Fagin! what a spree!’ 

'Vilhoroughly overpowered with the notion of Mr Chitling being 
the victim of the tender passion, Master Bates threw himself back 
in his chair with such violence that he lost his balance, and pitched 
over upon the floor; where (the accident abating nothing of his 
merriment) he lay at full length until his laugh was over, when he 
resumed his former position, and began another laugh. 

‘Never mind him, my dear,’ said the Jew, winking at Mr 
Dawkins, and giving Master Bates a reproving tap with the nozzle 
of the bellows, ‘Betsy’s a fine girl. Stick up to her, Tom. Stick up 
to her.’ 

‘What I mean to say, Fagin,’ replied Mr Chitling, very red in 
the face, ‘is, that that isn’t anything to anybody here.’ 

‘No more it is,’ replied the Jew; ‘Charley will talk. Don’t mind 
him, my dear; don’t mind him. Betsy’s a fine girl. Do as she bids 
you, Tom, and you will make your fortune.’ 

‘So I do do as she bids me,’ replied Mr Chitling; T shouldn’t 
have been milled, if it hadn’t been for her advice. But it turned 
out a good job for you; didn’t it, Fagin! And what’s sue weeks of it.^ 
It must come, some time or another, and why not in the winter 
time when you don’t want to go out a- walking so much; eh, Fagin ’ 

‘Ah, to be sure, my dear,’ replied the Jew. 

‘You wouldn’t mind it again, Tom, would you,’ asked the 
Dodger, winking upon Charley and the Jew, ‘if Bet was all right.^’ 

‘I mean to say that I shouldn’t,’ replied Tom, angrily. ‘There, 
now. Ah! Who’ll say as much as that, I should like to know; eh, 
Fagin 

‘Nobody, my dear,’ replied the Jew; ‘not a soul, Tom. I don’t 
know one of ’em that would do it besides you; not one of ’em, my 
dear.’ 

‘I might have got clear off, if I’d split upon her, mightn’t I, 
Fagin angrily pursued the poor half-witted dupe. ‘A word from 
"'me would have done it; wouldn’t it, Fagin?’ 

‘To be sure it would, my dear,’ replied the Jew. 

‘But I didn’t blab it; did I, Fagin?’ demanded Tom, pouring 
question upon question with great volubility. 

‘No, no, to be sure,’ replied the Jew; ‘you were too stout- 
hearted for that. A deal too stout, my dear!’ 


231 



Nasir TWIST 


‘Perhaps I was/ rejoined Tom, looking round; ‘and if I was, 
what’s to laugh at, in that; eh, Fagin?’ 

The Jew, perceiving that Mr Chitling was considerably rouse^" 
hastened to assure him that nobody was laughing; and to prove 
the gravity of the company, appealed to Master Bates, the principal 
offender. But, unfortunately, Charley, in opening his mouth to 
reply that he was never more serious in his life, was unable to pre- 
vent the escape of such a violent roar, that the abused Mr Chitling, 
witliout any preliminary ceremonies, rushed across the room and 
aimed a blow at the offender; who, being skilful in evading pur- 
suit, ducked to avoid it, and chose his time so well that it lighted on 
the chest of the merry old gentleman, and caused him to stagger to 
the wall, where he stood panting for breath, while Mr Chitling 
looked on in intense dismay. 

‘Hark!’ cried the Dodger at this moment, ‘I heard the tinkler.’ 
Catching up the light, he crept softly upstairs. 

The bell was rung again, with some impatience, while the party 
were in darkness. After a short pause, the Dodger reappeared, atid 
whispered Fagin mysteriously. 

‘■^atl’ cried the Jew, ‘alone.^’ 

The Dodger nodded in the affirmative, and, shading the flame 
of the candle with his hand, gave Charley Bates a private intima- 
tion, in dumb show, that he had better not be funny just then. 
Having performed this friendly office, he fixed his eyes on the 
Jew’s face, and awaited his directions. 

The old man bit his yellow fingers, and meditated for some 
seconds; his face working with agitation the while, as if he dreaded 
something, and feared to know the worst. At length he raised his 
head. 

‘Where is he.^’ he asked. 

The Dodger pointed to the floor above, and made a gesture, as 
if to leave the room. 

‘Yes,’ said the Jew, answering the mute inquiry; ‘bring him 
down. Hush! Quiet, Charley! Gently, Tom! Scarce, scarce!* 

This brief direction to Charley Bates, and his recent antagonist, 
was softly and immediately obeyed. There was no sound of their 
whereabout, when the Dodger descended the stairs, bearing the 
light in his hand, and followed by a man in a coarse smock-frock; 
who, after casting a hurried glance round the room, pulled off a 

232 



Nasir TWIST 


large wrapper which had concealed the lower portion of his face, 
and disclosed: all haggard, unwashed, and unshorn: the features 
"^flash Toby Crackit. 

‘How are you, Faguey?’ said this worthy, nodding to the Jew. 
‘Pop that shawl away in my castor. Dodger, so that I may know 
where to find it when I cut; that’s the time of day! You’ll be a fine 
young cracksman afore the old file now.’ 

With these words he pulled up the smock-frock; and, winding it 
round his middle, drew a chair to the fire, and placed his feet upon 
the hob. 

‘See there, Faguey,’ he said, pointing disconsolately to his top- 
boots; ‘not a drop of Day and Martin since you know when; not 
a bubble of blacking, by Jove! But don’t look at me in that way, 
man. All in good time. I can’t talk about business till I’ve eat and 
drank; so produce the sustainance, and let’s have a quiet fill-out 
for the first time these three days!’ 

The Jew motioned to the Dodger to place what eatables there 
'were, upon the table; and, seating himself opposite the house- 
breaker, waited his leisure. 

To judge from appearances, Toby was by no means in a hurry 
to open the conversation. At first, the Jew contented himself with 
patiently watching his countenance, as if to gain from its expres- 
sion some clue to the intelligence he brought; but in vain. He 
looked tired and worn, but there was the same complacent repose 
upon his features that they always wore: and through dirt, and 
beard, and whisker, there still shone, unimpaired, the self-satisfied 
smirk of flash Toby Crackit. Then, the Jew, in an agony of im- 
patience, watched every morsel he put into his mouth; pacing up 
and down the room, meanwhile, in irrepressible excitement. It 
was all of no use. Toby continued to eat with the utmost outward 
indifference, until he could eat no more; then, ordering the Dodger 
out, he closed the door, mixed a glass of spirits and water, and com- 
posed himself for talking. 

‘First and foremost, Faguey,’ said Toby. 

‘Yes, yes,’ interposed the Jew, drawing up his chair. 

Mr Crackit stopped to take a draught of spirits and water, and to 
declare that the gin was excellent; then placing his feet against the 
low mantelpiece, so as to bring his boots to ^out the level of his 
eye, he quietly resumed. 

233 



Nasir TWIST 


'First and foremost, Faguey,’ said the housebreaker, 'how’s 
Bill?’ 

'What!’ screamed the Jew, starting from his seat. 

‘Why, you don’t mean to say -’ began Toby, turning pale. 

‘Mean!’ cried the Jew, stamping furiously on the ground. 
‘Where are they? Sikes and the boy! Where are they? Where have 
they been? Where are they hiding? Why have they not been here?’ 

‘The crack failed,’ said Toby, faintly. 

‘I know it,’ replied the Jew, tearing a newspaper from his 
pocket and pointing to it. 'What more?’ 

‘They fired and hit the boy. We cut over the fields at the back, 
with him between us ~ straight as the crow flies — through hedge 
and ditch. They gave chase. Damme! the whole country was 
awake, and the dogs upon us.’ 

‘The boy!’ 

‘Bill had him on his back, and scudded like the wind. We 
stopped to take him between us; his head hung down, and he was 
cold. They were close upon our heels; every man for himself, and 
each from the gallows! We parted company, and left the youngster 
lying in a ditch. Alive or dead, that’s all I know about him.’ 

The Jew stopped to hear no more; but uttering a loud yell, and 
twining his hands in his hair, rushed from the room, and from tlie 
house. 


* 


CHAPTER 26 

In which a mysterious Character appears upon the Scenes and many 
Things, inseparable from this History, are done and performed 


The old man had gained the street comer, before he began To ^ 
recover the effect of Toby Crackit’s intelligence. He had relaxed 
nothing of his unusual speed; but was still pressing onward, in 
the same wild and disordered manner, when the sudden dashing 
past of a carriage: and a boisterous cry from the foot passengers, 
who saw his danger: drove him back upon the pavement. Avoiding, 


234 



Nasir TWIST 


as much as possible, all the main streets, and skulking only through 
^ by-ways and alleys, he at length emerged on Snow Hill. Here 
he "walked even faster than before; nor did he linger until he had 
again turned into a court; when, as if conscious that he was now in 
his proper element, he fell into his usual shuffling pace, and seemed 
to breathe more freely. 

Near to the spot on which Snow Hill and Holborn Hill meet, 
there opens, upon the right hand as you come out of the City, 
a narrow and dismal alley leading to Saffron Hill. In its filthy 
shops are exposed for sale huge bunches of second-hand silk 
handkerchiefs, of all sizes and patterns; for here reside the traders 
who purchase them from pickpockets. Hundreds of these hand- 
kerchiefs hang dangling from pegs outside the windows or flaunt- 
ing from the door-posts; and the shelves, within, are piled with 
them. Confined as the limits of Field Lane are, it has its barber, 
its coffee-shop, its beer-shop, and its fried-fish warehouse. It is a 
commercial colony of itself: the emporium of petty larceny: visited 
at early morning, and setting-in of dusk, by silent merchants, who 
traffic in dark back-parlours, and who go as strangely as they come. 
Here, the clothesman, the shoe-vamper, and the rag-merchant, 
display their goods, as sign-boards to the petty thief; here, stores of 
old iron and bones, and heaps of mildewy fragments of woollen- 
stuff and linen, rust and rot in the grimy cellars. 

It was into this place that the Jew turned. He was well known 
to the sallow denizens of the lane; for such of them as were on the 
look-out to buy or sell, nodded, familiarly, as he passed along. He 
replied to their salutations in the same way; but bestowed no 
closer recognition until he reached the farther end of the alley; 
when he stopped, to address a salesman of small stature, who had 
squeezed as much of his person into a child’s chair as the chair 
would hold, and was smoking a pipe at his warehouse door. 

‘Why, the sight of you, Mr Fagin, would cure the hoptalmy!’^ 
^said this respectable trader, in acknowledgement of the Jew’s 
inquiry after his health. 

‘The neighbourhood was a little too hot, Lively,’ said Fagin, 
elevating his eyebrows, and crossing his hands upon his shoulders. 

‘Well, Tve heerd that complaint of it, once or twice before,’ 
replied the trader; ‘but it soon cools down a^n; don’t you find it 
so?’ 


235 



Nasir TWIST 


Fagin nodded in the affirmative. Pointing in the direction of 
Saffron Hill, he inquired whether anyone was up yonder tonigli^r- 

‘At the Cripples?’ inquired the man. 

The Jew nodded. 

‘Let me see,’ pursued the merchant, reflecting. ‘Yes, there’s some 
half-dozen of ’em gone in, that I knows. I don’t think your friend’s 
there.’ 

‘Sikes is not, I suppose?’ inquired the Jew, with a disappointed 
countenance. 

'Non istwentus^ as the lawyers say,’ replied the little man, 
shaking his head, and looking amazingly sly. ‘Have you got any- 
thing in my line tonight?’ 

‘Nothing tonight,’ said the Jew, turning away. 

‘Are you going up to the Cripples, Fagin?* cried the little man, 
calling after him. ‘Stop 1 1 don’t mind if I have a drop there with 
you!’ 

But as the Jew, looking back, waved his hand to intimate that 
he preferred being alone; and, moreover, as the little man could 
not very easily disengage himself from the chair; the sign of the 
Cripples was, for a time, bereft of the advantage of Mr Lively’s 
presence. By the time he had got upon his legs, the Jew had dis- 
appeared; so Mr Lively, after ineffectually standing on tiptoe, in the 
hope of catching sight of him, again forced himself into the little 
chair, and, exchanging a shake of the head with a lady in the 
opposite shop, in which doubt and mistrust were plainly mingled, 
resumed his pipe with a grave demeanour. 

The Three Cripples, or rather the Cripples: which was the sign 
by which the establishment was familiarly known to its patrons: 
was the public-house in which Mr Sikes and his dog have already 
figured. Merely making a sign to a man at the bar, Fagin walked 
straight upstairs, and opening the door of a room, and softly 
insinuating himself into the chamber, looked anxiously about: 
shading his eyes with his hand, as if in search of some particular^ 
person. 

The room was illuminated by two gas-lights, the glare of which 
was prevented by the barred shutters, and closely-drawn curtains 
of faded red, from being visible outside. The ceiling was blackened, 
to prevent its colour from being injured by the flaring of the lamps; 
and the place was so full of dense tobacco smoke, that at first it 

236 



Nasir TWIST 


was scarcely possible to discern anything more. By degrees, how- 
ever, as some of it cleared away through the open door, an assem- 
blage of heads, as confused as the noises that greeted the ear, might 
be made out; and as the eye grew more accustomed to the scene, 
the spectator gradually became aware of the presence of a numerous 
company, male and female, crowded round a long table: at the 
upper end of which, sat a chairman with a hammer of office in his 
hand; while a professional gentleman, with a bluish nose, and his 
face tied up for the benefit of a toothache, presided at a jingling 
piano in a remote corner. 

As Fagin stepped softly in, the professional gentleman, running 
over the keys by way of prelude, occasioned a general cry of order 
for a song; which, having subsided, a young lady proceeded to 
entertain the company with a ballad in four verses, between each 
of which the accompanyist played the melody all through, as loud 
as he could. When this was over, the chairman gave a sentiment, 
after which, the professional gentlemen on the chairman’s right 
and left volunteered a duet, and sang it, with great applause. 

It was curious to observe some faces which stood out promin- 
ently from among the group. There was the chairman himself, 
(the landlord of the house,) a coarse, rough, heavy built fellow, 
who, while the songs were proceeding, rolled his eyes hither and 
thither, and, seeming to give himself up to joviality, had an eye for 
everything that was done, and an ear for everything that was said- 
and sharp ones, too. Near him were the singers: receiving, with 
professional indifference, the compliments of the company, and 
applying themselves, in turn, to a dozen proffered glasses of spirits 
and water, tendered by their more boisterous admirers; whose 
countenances, expressive of almost every vice in almost every 
grade, irresistibly attracted the attention, by their very repulsive- 
ness. Cunning, ferocity, and drunkenness in all its stages, were 
there, in their strongest aspects; and women: some with the last 
lingering tinge of their early freshness almost fading as you looked: 
others with every mark and stamp of their sex utterly beaten out, 
and presenting but one loathsome blank of profligacy and crime; 
some mere girls, others but young women, and none past the prime 
of life; formed the darkest and saddest portion of this dreary 
picture. 

Fagin, troubled by no grave emotions, looked eagerly from face 

237 



Nasir TWIST 


to face while these proceedings were in progress; but apparently 
without meeting that of which he was in search. Succeeding, at 
length, in catching the eye of the man who occupied the chair, he 
beckoned to him slightly, and left the room, as quietly as he had 
entered it. 

‘What can I do for you, Mr Fagin.^’ inquired the man, as he 
followed him out to the landing. ‘Won’t you join us.^ They’ll be 
delighted, every one of ’em.’ 

The Jew shook his head impatiently, and said in a whisper, ‘Is 
he here.^’ 

‘No,’ rephed the man. 

‘And no news of Barney.^’ inquired Fagin. 

‘None,’ replied the landlord of the Cripples; for it was he. ‘He 
won’t stir till it’s all safe. Depend on it, they’re on the scent down 
there; and that if he moved, he’d blow upon the thing at once. He’s 
all right enough, Barney is, else I should have heard of him. I’ll 
pound it, that Barney’s managing properly. Let him alone for that.’ 

‘Will he be here tonight.^’ asked the Jew, laying the same em- 
phasis on the pronoun as before. 

‘Monks, do you mean.^’ inquired the landlord, hesitating. 

‘Hush!’ said the Jew. ‘Yes.’ 

‘Certain,’ replied the man, drawing a gold watch from his fob; 
‘I expected him here before now. If you’ll wait ten minutes, he’ll 
be 

‘No, no,’ said the Jew, hastily; as though, however desirous he 
might be to see the person in question, he was nevertheless relieved 
by his absence. ‘Tell him I came here to see him; and that he must 
come to me tonight. No, say tomorrow. As he is not here, to- 
morrow will be time enough.’ 

‘Good!’ said the man. ‘Nothing more.^’ 

‘Not a word now,’ said the Jew, descending the stairs. 

*I say,’ said the other, looking over the rails, and speaking in a 
hoarse whisper; ‘what a time this would be for a sell! I’ve got Phil 
Barker here, so drunk, that a boy might take him.’ 

‘Aha! But it’s not Phil Barker’s time,’ said the Jew, looking up. 
‘Phil has something more to do, before we can afford to part with 
him; so go back to the company, my dear, and tell them to lead 
merry lives — while thery last, Ha! hal ha! ’ 

The landlord reciprocated the old man’s laugh; and returned to 

2^8 



Nasir TWIST 


his guests. The Jew was no sooner alone, than his countenance 
resumed its former expression of anxiety and thought. After a brief 
reflection, he called a hack-cabriolet, and bade the man drive to- 
wards Bethnal Green. He dismissed him within some quarter of a 
mile of Mr Sikes’s residence, and performed the short remainder of 
the distance on foot. 

‘Now,’ muttered the Jew, as he knocked at the door, ‘if there is 
any deep play here, I shall have it out of you, my girl, cunning as 
you are.’ 

She was in her room, the woman said. Fagin crept softly up- 
stairs, and entered it without any previous ceremony. The girl was 
alone; lying with her head upon the table, and her hair straggling 
ovei It. 

‘She has been drinking,’ thought the Jew, coolly, ‘or perhaps 
she is only miserable.’ 

The old man turned to close the door, as he made this reflection; 
the noise thus occasioned, roused the girl. She eyed his crafty 
face narrowly, as she inquired whether there was any news, and as 
she listened to his recital of Toby Crackit’s story. When it was 
concluded, she sank into her former attitude, but spoke not a word. 
She pushed the candle impatiently away; and once or twice as she 
feverishly changed her position, shuffled her feet upon the ground; 
but this was all. 

During the silence, the Jew looked restlessly about the room, 
as if to assure himself that there were no appearances of Sikes 
having covertly returned. Apparently satisfied with his inspection, 
he coughed twice or thrice, and made as many efforts to open a 
conversation; but the girl heeded him no more than if he had been 
made of stone. At length he made another attempt; and rubbing 
his hands together, said, in his most conciliatory tone, 

‘And where should you think Bill was now, my dear.^’ 

The girl moaned out some half-intelligible reply, that she could 
not tell; and seemed, from the smothered noise that escaped her, to 
be crying. 

‘And the boy, too,’ said the Jew, straining his eyes to catch a 
glimpse of her face. ‘Poor leetle child! Left in a ditch, Nance; only 
think! ’ 

‘The child,’ said the girl, suddenly looking up, ‘is better where 
he is, than among us; and if no harm comes to Bill from it, I hope 

239 



Nasir TWIST 


he Hes dead in the ditch, and that his young bones may rot there/ 
‘What!’ cried the Jew, in amazement. 

‘Ay, I do,’ returned the girl, meeting his gaze. ‘I shall be glad to 
have him away from my eyes, and to know that the worst is over. 
I can’t bear to have him about me. The sight of him turns me 
against myself, and all of you.’ 

‘Pooh!’ said the Jew, scornfully. ‘You’re drunk.’ - 
‘Am I.^’ cried the girl, bitterly. ‘It’s no fault of yours, if I am 
not! You’d never have me anything else, if you had your will, 
except now; - the humour doesn’t suit you, does it.^’ 

‘No!’ rejoined the Jew, furiously. ‘It does not.’ 

‘Change it, then!’ responded the girl, with a laugh. 

‘Change it!’ exclaimed the Jew, exasperated beyond all bounds 
by his companion’s unexpected obstinacy, and the vexation of the 
night, ‘I WILL change it! Listen to me, you drab. Listen to me, who 
with six words, can strangle Sikes as surely as if I had his bull’s 
throat between my fingers now. If he comes back, and leaves the 
boy behind him; if he gets off free, and dead or alive, fails to restore 
him to me; murder him yourself if you would have him escape 
Jack Ketch. And do it the moment he sets foot in this room, or 
mind me, it will be too late! ’ 

‘What is all this.^’ cried the girl involuntarily. 

‘What is it.^’ pursued Fagin, mad with rage. ‘When the boy’s 
worth hundreds of pounds to me, am I to lose what chance threw 
me in the way of getting safely, through the whims of a drunken 
gang that I could whistle away the lives of! And me bound, too, to 
a born devil that only wants the will, and has the power to, to 
Panting for breath, the old man stammered for a word; and in 
that instant checked the torrent of his wrath, and changed his whole 
demeanour. A moment before, his clenched hands had grasped the 
air; his eyes had dilated; and his face grown livid with passion; 
but now, he shrunk into a chair, and, cowering together, trembled 
with the apprehension of having himself disclosed some hidden 
villany. After a short silence, he ventured to look round at his 
companion. He appeared somewhat reassured, on beholding her 
in the same listless attitude from which he had first roused her. 

‘Nancy, dear!’ croaked the Jew, in his usual voice. ‘Did you 
mind me, dear.^’ 

‘Don’t worry me now, Fagin!’ replied the girl, raising her head 


240 



Nasir TWIST 


languidly. ‘If Bill has not done it this time, he will another. He has 
done many a good job for you, and will do many more when he 
can; and when he can’t he won’t; so no more about that.’ 

‘ Regarding this boy, my dear? ’ said the Jew, rubbing the palms 
of his hands nervously together. 

‘The boy must take his chance with the rest,’ interrupted Nancy, 
hastily; ‘and I say again, I hope he is dead, and out of harm’s way, 
and out of yours - that is, if Bill comes to no harm. And if Toby 
got clear off. Bill’s pretty sure to be safe; for Bill’s worth two of 
Toby any time.’ 

‘And about what I was saying, my dear?’ observed the Jew, 
keeping his glistening eye steadily upon her. 

‘You must say it all over again, if it’s anything you want me to 
do,’ rejoined Nancy; ‘ and if it is, you had better wait till tomorrow. 
You put me up for a minute; but now I’m stupid again.’ 

Fagin put several other questions: all with the same drift of 
ascertaining whether the girl had profited by his unguarded hints; 
but, she answered them so readily, and was withal so utterly un- 
moved by his searching looks, that his original impression of her 
being more than a trifle in liquor, was confirmed. Nancy, indeed, 
was not exempt from a failing which was very common among the 
Jew’s female pupils; and in which, in their tenderer years, they were 
rather encouraged than checked. Her disordered appearance, and a 
wholesale perfume of Geneva which pervaded the apartment, 
afforded strong confirmatory evidence of the justice of the Jew’s 
supposition; and when, after indulging in the temporary display of 
violence above described, she subsided, first into dullness, and 
afterwards into a compound of feelings, under the influence of 
which she shed tears one minute, and in the next gave utterance to 
various exclamations of ‘Never say die!’ and divers calculations as 
to what might be the amount of the odds so long as a lady or 
gentleman was happy, Mr Fagin, who had had considerable ex- 
perience of such matters in his time^ saw, with great satisfaction, 
that she was very far gone indeed. 

Having eased his mind by this discovery; and having accom- 
plished his twofold object of imparting to the girl what he had, 
that night, heard, and of ascertaining, with his own eyes, that Sikes 
had not returned, Mr Fagin again turned his face homeward: 
leaving his young friend asleep, with her head upon the table. 


241 



Nasir TWIST 

It was within an hour of midnight. The weather being dark, and 
piercing cold, he had no great temptation to loiter. The sharp 
wind that scoured the streets, seemed to have cleared them of 
passengers, as of dust and mud, for few people were abroad, and 
they were to all appearance hastening fast home. It blew from the 
right quarter for the Jew, however, and straight before it he went: 
trembling, and shivering, as every fresh gust drove him rudely on 
his way. 

He had reached the corner of his own street, and was already 
fumbling in his pocket for the door-key, when a dark figure 
emerged from a projecting entrance which lay in deep shadow, and, 
crossing the road, glided up to him unperceived. 

‘Fagin!’ whispered a voice close to his ear. 

‘Ah!’ said the Jew, turning quickly round, ‘is that-’ 

‘Yesl’ interrupted the stranger, harshly. T have been lingering 
here these two hours. Where the devil have you been.^’ 

‘ On your business, my dear,* replied the Jew, glancing uneasily 
at his companion, and slackening his pace as he spoke. ‘ On your 
business all night.’ 

‘Oh, of course!’ said the stranger, with a sneer. ‘Well; and 
what’s come of it?’ 

‘Nothing good,’ said the Jew, 

‘Nothing bad, I hope?’ said the stranger, stopping short, and 
turning a startled look on his companion. 

The Jew shook his head, and was about to reply, when the 
stranger, interrupting him, motioned to the house, before which 
they had by this time arrived; remarking, that he had better say 
what he had got to say, under cover: for his blood was chilled with 
standing about so long, and the wind blew through him. 

Fagin looked as if he could have willingly excused himself from 
taking home a visitor at that unseasonable hour; and, indeed, 
muttered something about having no fire; but his companion 
repeating his request in a peremptory manner, he unlocked the 
door, and requested him to close it softly, while he got a light. 

Tt’s as dark as the grave,’ said the man, groping forward a few 
steps. ‘Make haste!’ 

‘ Shut the door,’ whispered Fagin from the end of the passage. 
As he spoke, it closed with a loud noise. 

‘ That wasn’t my doing,’ said the other man, feeling his way. 


242 



Nasir TWIST 


‘ The wind blew it to, or it shut of its own accord: one or the other. 
JLook sharp with the light, or I shall knock my brains out against 
something in this confounded hole.’ 

Fagin stealthily descended the kitchen stairs. After a short 
absence, he returned with a lighted candle, and the intelligence that 
Toby Crackit was asleep in the back room below, and that the boys 
were in the front one. Beckoning the man to follow him, he led the 
way upstairs. 

‘We can say the few words weVe got to say in here, my dear,’ 
said the Jew, throwing open a door on the first floor; ‘and as 
there are holes in the shutters, and we never show lights to our 
neighbours, we’ll set the candle on the stairs. There!’ 

With those words, the Jew, stooping down, placed the candle 
on an upper flight of stairs, exactly opposite to the room door, and 
led the way into the apartment, which was destitute of all movables 
save a broken arm-chair, and an old couch or sofa without covering, 
which stood behind the door. Upon this piece of furniture, the 
stranger sat himself with the air of a weary man; and the Jew, draw- 
ing up the arm-chair opposite, they sat face to face. It was not quite 
dark; the door was partially open; and the candle outside, threw 
feeble reflection on the opposite wall. 

They conversed for some time in whispers. Though nothing of 
the conversation was distinguishable beyond a few disjointed 
words here and there, a listener might easily have perceived that 
Fagin appeared to be defending himself against some remarks of the 
stranger; and that the latter was in a state of considerable irritation. 
They might have been talking, thus, for a quarter of an hour or 
more, when Monks - by which name the Jew had designated the 
strange man several times in the course of their colloquy - said, 
raising his voice a little, 

‘I tell you again, it was badly planned. Why not have kept him 
here among the rest, and made a sneaking, snivelling pickpocket 
^ of him at once.^’ 

‘Only hear him!’ exclaimed the Jew, shrugging his shoulders. 

‘Why, do you mean to say you couldn’t have done it, if you 
had chosen.^’ demanded Monks, sternly. ‘Haven’t you done it, 
with other boys, scores of times If you had had patience for a 
twelve-month, at most, couldn’t you have got him convicted, and 
sent safely out of the kingdom; perhaps for life.^’ 

243 



Nasir TWIST 


‘Whose turn would that have served, my dear?" inquired the 
Jew humbly. 

‘Mine/ replied Monks. 

‘But not mine/ said the Jew, submissively. ‘He might have 
become of use to me. When theie are two parties to a bargain, it is 
only reasonable that the interests of both should be consulted; is it, 
my good friend.^’ 

‘What then?" demanded Monks. 

‘I saw it was not easy to train him to the business," replied the 
Jew; ‘he was not like other boys in the same circumstances." 

‘Curse him, no!" muttered the man, ‘or he would have been a 
thief, long ago." 

‘I had no hold upon him to make him worse," pursued the Jew, 
anxiously watching the countenance of his companion. ‘His 
hand was not in. I had nothing to frighten him with; which we 
always must have in the beginning, or we labour in vain. What 
could I do? Send him out with the Dodger and Charley? We had 
enough of that, at first, my dear; I trembled for us all.’ 

‘ That was not my doing," observed Monks. 

‘No, no, my dear!’ renewed the Jew. ‘And I don’t quarrel with 
it now; because, if it had never happened, you might never have 
clapped eyes upon the boy to notice him, and so led to the dis- 
covery that it was him you were looking for. Well! I got him back 
for you by means of the girl; and then she begins to favour him." 

‘Throttle the girl!’ said Monks, impatiently. 

‘Why, we can’t afford to do that just now, my dear,’ replied 
the Jew, smiling; ‘and, besides, that sort of thing is not in our way; 
or, one of these days, I might be glad to have it done. I know what 
these girls are. Monks, well. As soon as the boy begins to harden, 
she’ll care no more for him, than for a block of wood. You want 
him made a thief. If he is alive, I can make him one from this time; 
and if - if’ - said the Jew, drawing nearer to the other, - ‘it’s not 
likely, mind, - but if the worst comes to the worst, and he is dead 

‘It’s no fault of mine if he is!" interposed the other man, with 
a look of terror, and clasping the Jew’s arm with trembling hands. 
‘Mind that, Fagin! I had no hand in it. Anything but his death, I 
told you from the first. I won’t shed blood; it’s always found out, 
and haunts a man besides. If they shot him dead, I was not the 
cause; do you hear me? Fire this infernal den! What’s that?" 

244 



Nasir TWIST 


‘What!’ cried the Jew, grasping the coward round the body, 
with both arms, as he sprung to his feet. ‘Where?’ 

^ ‘Yonder!’ replied the man, glaring at the opposite wall ‘The 
shadow! I saw the shadow of a woman, in a cloak and bonnet, pass 
along the wainscot like a breath! ’ 

The Jew released his hold, and they rushed tumultuously from 
the room. The candle, wasted by the draught, was standing where 
it had been placed. It showed them only the empty staircase, and 
their own white faces. They listened intently: a profound silence 
reigned throughout the house. 

‘It’s your f^cy,’ said the Jew, taking up the light and turning 
to his companion. 

‘I’ll swear I saw it! ’ replied Monks, trembling violently. ‘It was 
bending forward when I saw it first; and when I spoke, it darted 
away.’ 

The Jew glanced contemptuously at the pale face of his associ- 
ate, and, telling him he could follow, if he pleased, ascended the 
stairs. They looked into all the rooms; they were cold, bare, and 
empty. They descended into the passage, and thence into the 
cellars below. The green damp hung upon the low walls; the tracks 
of the snail and slug glistened in the light of the candle; but all was 
still as death. 

‘What do you think now.^ ’ said the Jew, when they had regained 
the passage. ‘Besides ourselves, there’s not a creature in the house 
except Toby and the boys; and they’re safe enough. See here!’ 

As a proof of the fact, the Jew drew forth two keys from his 
pocket; and explained that when he first went down stairs, he had 
locked them in, to prevent any intrusion on the conference. 

This accumulated testimony effectually staggered Mr Monks. 
His protestations had gradually become less and less vehement as 
they proceeded in their search without making any discovery; 
and, now, he gave vent to several very grim laughs, and confessed 
it could only have been his excited imagination. He declined any 
renewal of the conversation, however, for that night: suddenly 
remembering that it was past one o’clock. And so the amiable 
couple parted. 



CHAPTER 27 


Atones for the Unpoliteness of a former Chapter ^ which deserted 
a Lady) most unceremoniously 


As it would be by no means seemly in a humble author to keep so 
mighty a personage as a beadle waiting, with his back to the fire, 
and the skirts of his coat gathered up under his arms, until such 
time as it might suit his pleasure to relieve him; and as it would still 
less become his station, or his gallantry, to involve in the same 
neglect a lady on whom that beadle had looked with an eye of tender- 
ness and affection, and in whose ear he had whispered sweet words, 
which, coming from such a quarter, might well thrill the bosom of 
maid or matron of whatsoever degree; the historian whose pen 
traces these words - trusting that he knows his place, and that he 
entertains a becoming reverence for those upon earth to whom' 
high and important authority is delegated - hastens to pay them 
that respect which their position demands, and to treat diem with 
all that duteous ceremony which their exalted rank, and (by con- 
sequence) great virtues, imperatively claim at his hands. Towards 
this end, indeed, he had purposed to introduce, in this place, a 
dissertation touching the divine right of beadles, and elucidative of 
the position, that a beadle can do no wrong: which could not fail 
to have been both pleasurable and profitable to the right-minded 
reader, but which he is unfortunately compelled, by want of time 
and space, to postpone to some more convenient and fitting 
opportunity; on the arrival of which, he will be prepared to show, 
that a beadle properly constituted: that is to say, a parochial beadle, 
attached to a parochial workhouse, and attending in his official 
capacity the parochial church: is, in right and virtue of his office, 
possessed of all the excellences and best qualities of humanity; 
and that to none of those excellences, can mere companies' beadles^' 
or court-of-law beadles, or even chapel-of-ease beadles (save the 
last, and they in a very lowly and inferior degree), lay the remotest 
sustainable claim. 

Mr Bumble had re-counted the teaspoons, re-weighed the sugar- 
tongs, made a closer inspection of the milk-pot, and ascertained to 

246 



Nasir TWIST 


a nicety the exact condition of the furniture, down to the very 
horse-hair seats of the chairs; and had repeated each process full 
half a dozen times; before he began to think that it was time for 
Mrs Corney to return. Thinking begets thinking; as there were no 
sounds of Mrs Corney’s approach, it occurred to Mr Bumble that 
it would be an innocent and virtuous way of spending the time, if 
he were further to allay his curiosity by a cursory glance at the 
interior of Mrs Corney’s chest of drawers. 

Having listened at the keyhole, to assure himself that nobody 
was approaching the chamber, Mr Bumble, beginning at the 
bottom, proceeded to make himself acquainted with the contents 
of the three long drawers: which, being filled with various garments 
of good fashion and texture, carefully preserved between two layers 
of old newspapers, speckled with dried lavender: seemed to yield 
him exceeding satisfaction. Arriving, in course of time, at the right- 
hand corner drawer (in which was the key), and beholding therein 
a small padlocked box, which, being shaken, gave forth a pleasant 
sound, as of the chinking of coin, Mr Bumble returned with a 
stately walk to the fireplace; and, resuming his old attitude, said, 
with a grave and determined air, T’ll do it!’ He followed up this 
remarkable declaration, by shaking his head in a waggish manner 
for ten minutes, as though he were remonstrating with himself for 
being such a pleasant dog; and then, he took a view of his legs in 
profile, with much seeming pleasure and interest. 

He was still placidly engaged in this latter survey, when Mrs 
Corney, hurrying into the room, threw herself, in a breath- 
less state, on a chair by the fireside, and covering her eyes 
with one hand, placed the other over her heart, and gasped for 
breath. 

'Mrs Corney,’ said Mr Bumble, stooping over the matron, 
‘what is this, ma’am.^ Has anything happened, ma’am? Pray 
answer me; I’m on - on Mr Bumble, in his alarm, could not 
immediately think of the word ‘tenter-hooks’, so he said, ‘broken 
bottles’. 

‘Oh, Mr Bumble!’ cried the lady, *I have been so dreadfully 
put outl’ 

‘Put out, ma’am!’ exclaimed Mr Bumble; ‘who has dared 
to -? I know!’ said Mr Bumble, checking himself, with native 
majesty, ‘this is them wicious paupers!’ 


247 



Nasir TWIST 


‘It’s dreadful to think of!’ said the lady, shuddering. 

‘Then dorCt think of it, ma’am,’ rejoined Mr Bumble. 

*I can’t help it,’ whimpered the lady. 

‘Then take something, ma’am,’ said Mr Bumble soothingly. ‘A 
little of the wine.^’ 

‘Not for the world!’ replied Mrs Comey. T couldn’t, ~ oh! 
The top shelf in the right-hand corner - oh!’ Uttering these words, 
the good lady pointed, distractedly, to the cupboard, and under- 
went a convulsion from internal spasms. Mr Bumble rushed to the 
closet; and, snatching a pint green-glass bottle from the shelf thus 
incoherently indicated, filled a teacup with its contents, and held it 
to the lady’s lips. 

‘I’m better now,’ said Mrs Corney, falling back, after drinking 
half of it. 

Mr Bumble raised his eyes piously to the ceiling in thankfulness; 
and, bringing them down again to the brim of the cup, lifted it to 
his nose. 

‘Peppermint,’ exclaimed Mrs Corney, in a faint voice, smiling"' 
gently on the beadle as she spoke. ‘Try it! There’s a little - a little 
something else in it.’ 

Mr Bumble tasted the medicine with a doubtful look; smacked 
his lips; took another taste; and put the cup down empty. 

‘It’s very comforting,’ said Mrs Corney. 

‘Very much so indeed, ma’am,’ said the beadle. As he spoke, 
he drew a chair beside the matron, and tenderly inquired what had 
happened to distress her. 

‘Nothing,’ replied Mrs Comey. ‘I am a foolish, excitable, weak 
creetur.’ 

‘Not weak, ma’am,’ retorted Mr Bumble, drawing his chair a 
little closer. ‘Are you a v/eak creetur, Mrs Corney.^’ 

‘We are all weak creeturs,’ said Mrs Corney, laying down a 
general principle. 

‘ So we are,’ said the beadle. 

Nothing was said, on either side, for a minute or two after-" 
wards. By the expiration of that time, Mr Bumble had illustrated 
the position by removing his left arm from the back of Mrs 
Comey’s chair, where it had previously rested, to Mrs Corney’s 
apron-string, round which it gradually became entwined, 

‘We are all weak creeturs,’ said Mr Bumble. 

248 



Nasir TWIST 


Mrs Comey sighed. 

‘Don’t sigh, Mrs Corney/ said Mr Bumble. 

‘I can’t help it,’ said Mrs Corney. And she sighed again. 

‘This is a very comfortable room, ma’am,’ said Mr Bumble, 
looking round. ‘Another room, and this, ma’am, would be a 
complete thing.’ 

‘It would be too much for one,’ murmured the lady. 

‘But not for two, ma’am,’ rejoined Mr Bumble, in soft accents. 
‘Eh, Mrs Corney?’ 

Mrs Corney drooped her head, when the beadle said this; the 
beadle drooped his, to get a view of Mrs Corney’s face. Mrs 
Corney, with great propriety, turned her head away, and released 
her hand to get at her pocket-handkerchief; but insensibly replaced 
it in that of Mr Bumble. 

‘The board allow you coals, don’t they, Mrs Corney?’ inquired 
the beadle, affectionately pressing her hand. 

‘And candles,’ replied Mrs Corney, slightly returning the 
pressure. 

‘ Coals, candles, and house-rent free,’ said Mr Bumble. ‘ Oh, Mrs 
Corney, what a Angel you are!’ 

The lady was not proof against this burst of feeling. She sank 
into Mr Bumble’s arms; and that gentleman in his agitation, im- 
printed a passionate kiss upon her chaste nose. 

‘Such porochial perfection!’ exclaimed Mr Bumble, raptuiously. 
‘You know that Mr Slout is worse tonight, my fascinator?’ 

‘Yes,’ replied Mrs Corney, bashfully. 

‘He can’t live a week, the doctor says,’ pursued Mr Bumble. 
‘He is the master of this establishment; his death will cause a 
wacancy: that wacancy must be filled up. Oh, Mrs Corney, what a 
prospect this opens! What a opportunity for a joining of hearts and 
housekeepings! ’ 

Mrs Corney sobbed. 

‘The little word?’ said Mr Bumble, bending over the bashful 
"'beauty. ‘The one little, little, little word, my blessed Corney?’ 

‘ Ye - ye — yes! ’ sighed out the matron. 

‘One more,’ pursued the beadle; ‘compose your darling feelings 
for only one more. When is it to come off?’ 

Mrs Corney twice essayed to speak: and twice failed. At length 
summoning up courage, she threw her arms round Mr Bumble’s 

249 



Nasir TWIST 


neck, and said, it might be as soon as ever he pleased, and that he 
was ‘ a irresistible duck’. ^ 

Matters being thus amicably and satisfactorily arranged, the 
contract was solemnly ratified in another teacupful of the pepper- 
mint mixture; which was rendered the more necessary, by the 
flutter and agitation of the lady’s spirits. While it was being dis- 
posed of, she acquainted Mr Bumble with the old woman’s 
decease. 

‘Very good,’ said that gentleman, sipping his peppermint; 
‘I’ll call at Sowerberry’s as I go home, and tell him to send to- 
morrow morning. Was it that as frightened you, love?’ 

‘It wasn’t anything particular, dear,’ said the lady, evasively. 

‘It must have been something, love,’ urged Mr Bumble. ‘Won’t 
you tell your own B.?’ 

‘Not now,’ rejoined the lady; ‘one of these days. After we’re 
married, dear.’ 

‘After we’re married!’ exclaimed Mr Bumble. ‘It wasn’t any 
impudence from any of them male paupers as -’ 

‘No, no, love!’ interposed the lady, hastily. 

‘If I thought it was,’ continued Mr Bumble; ‘if I thought as any 
one of ’em had dared to lift his wulgar eyes to that lovely 
countenance -’ 

‘They wouldn’t have dared to do it, love,* responded the lady. 

‘They had better not!’ said Mr Bumble, clenching his fist. 
‘Let me see any man, porochial or extra-porochial, as would pre- 
sume to do it; and I can tell him that he wouldn’t do it a second 
time!’ 

Unenibellished by any violence of gesticulation, this might have 
seemed no very high compliment to the lady’s charms; but, as Mr 
Bumble accompanied the threat with many warlike gestures, she 
was much touched with this proof of his devotion, and protested, 
with great admiration, that he was indeed a dove. 

The dove then turned up his coat-collar, and put on his cocked 
hat; and, having exchanged a long and affectionate embrace wiflT 
his future partner, once again braved the cold wind of the night: 
merely pausing, for a few minutes, in the male paupers’ ward, to 
abuse them a little, with the view of satisfying himself that he could 
fill the office of workhouse-master with needful acerbity. Assured 
of his qualifications, Mr Bumble left the building with a light heart, 

250 



Nasir TWIST 


and bright visions of his future promotion: which served to occupy 
his mind until he reached the shop of the undertaker. 

Now, Mr and Mrs Sowerberry having gone out to tea and supper, 
and Noah Claypole not being at any time disposed to take upon 
himself a greater amount of physical exertion than is necessary to a 
convenient performance of the two functions of eating and drink- 
ing, the shop was not closed, although it was past the usual hour of 
shutting-up. Mr Bumble tapped with his cane on the counter several 
times; but, attracting no attention, and beholding a light shining 
through the glass-window of the little parlour at the back of the 
shop, he made bold to peep in and see what was going forward; 
and when he saw what was going forward, he was not a little 
surprised. 

The cloth was laid for supper; the table was covered with bread 
and butter, plates and glasses; a porter-pot and wine-bottle. At the 
upper end of the table, Mr Noah Claypole lolled negligently in an 
easy-chair, with his legs thrown over one of the arms: an open 
clasp-knife in one hand, and a mass of buttered bread in the other. 
Close beside him stood Charlotte, opening oysters from a barrel: 
which Mr Claypole condescended to swallow, with remarkable 
avidity. A more than ordinary redness in the region of the young 
gentleman’s nose, and a kind of fixed wink in his right eye, denoted 
that he was in a slight degree intoxicated; these symptoms were con- 
firmed by the intense relish with which he took his oysters, for 
which nothing but a strong appreciation of their cooling properties, 
in cases of internal fever, could have sufficiently accounted. 

‘Here’s a delicious fat one, Noah, dear!’ said Charlotte; ‘try 
him, do; only this one.’ 

‘What a delicious thing is a oyster!’ remarked Mr Claypole, 
after he had swallowed it. ‘What a pity it is, a number of ’em should 
ever make you feel uncomfortable; isn’t it, Charlotte?’ 

‘It’s quite a cruelty,’ said Charlotte. 

‘So it is,’ acquiesced Mr Claypole. ‘A’nt yer fond of oy- 
"sters?’ 

‘Not overmuch,’ replied Charlotte, ‘I like to see you eat ’em, 
Noah dear, better than eating ’em myself.’ 

‘Lor’l’ said Noah, reflectively; ‘how queer!’ 

‘Have another,’ said Charlotte, ‘ Here’s one with such a beautiful, 
delicate beard!’ 


251 




Mr Claypole as he appeared when his Master was out 


Nasir TWIST 


‘I can’t manage any more/ said Noah. ‘Fm very sorry. Come 
here, Charlotte, and Fll kiss yer.’ 

‘Whatl’ said Mr Bumble, bursting into the room. ‘Say that 
again, sir.’ 

Charlotte uttered a scream, and hid her face in her apron. 
Mr Claypole, without making any further change in his position 
than suffering his legs to reach the ground, gazed at the beadle in 
drunken terror. 

‘Say it again, you wile, owdacious fellow!’ said Mr Bumble. 
‘How dare you mention such a thing, sir.^ And how dare you 
encourage him, you insolent minx? Kiss her!’ exclaimed Mr 
Bumble, in strong indignation. ‘Faugh!’ 

‘I didn’t mean to do it!’ said Noah, blubbering. ‘She’s always 
a-kissing of me, whether I like it, or not.’ 

‘ Oh, Noah,’ cried Charlotte, reproachfully. 

‘Yer are; yer know yer are!’ retorted Noah. ‘She’s always a- 
doin’ of it. Mr Bumble, sir; she chucks me under the chin, please, 
"sir; and makes all manner of love!’ 

‘Silence!’ cried Mr Bumble, sternly. ‘Take yourself down- 
stairs, ma’am. Noah, you shut up the shop; say another word 
till your master comes home, at your peril; and, when he does 
come home, tell him that Mr Bumble said he was to send a old 
woman’s shell after breakfast tomorrow morning. Do you hear, 
sir? Kissing!’ cried Mr Bumble, holding up his hands. ‘The sin 
and wickedness of the lower orders in this porochial district is 
frightful! If parliament don’t take their abominable courses under 
consideration, this country’s ruined, and the character of the 
peasantry gone for ever! ’ With these words, the beadle strode, with 
a lofty and gloomy air, from the undertaker’s premises. 

And now that we have accompanied him so far on his road home, 
and have made all necessary preparations for the old woman’s 
funeral, let us set on foot a few inquiries after young Nasir Twist, 
and ascertain whether he be still lying in the ditch where Toby 
Crackit left him. 



CHAPTER 28 


Looks after Nasir, and proceeds with his Adventures 


‘Wolves tear your cursed throats!' muttered Sikes, grinding his 
teeth. ‘I wish I was among some of you; you’d howl the hoarser 
for it.’ 

As Sikes growled forth this imprecation, with the most des- 
perate ferocity that his desperate nature was capable of, he rested 
tlie body of the wounded boy across his bended knee; and turned 
his head, for an instant, to look back at his pursuers. 

There was little to be made out, in the mist and darkness; but 
the loud shouting of men vibrated through the air, and the barking 
of the neighbouring dogs, roused by the sound of the alarm bell, 
resounded in every direction. 

‘Stop, you white-livered hound!’ cried the robber, shouting 
after Toby Crackit, who, making the best use of his long legs, was 
already ahead. ‘Stop!’ 

The repetition of the word, brought Toby to a dead standstill. 
For he was not quite satisfied that he was beyond the range of 
pistol-shot; and Sikes was in no mood to be played with. 

‘ Bear a hand with the boy,’ cried Sikes, beckoning furiously to 
his confederate. ‘Come back!’ 

Toby made a show of returning; but ventured, in a low voice, 
broken for want of breath, to intimate considerable reluctance as 
he came slowly along. 

‘ Quicker! ’ cried Sikes, laying the boy in a dry ditch at his feet, 
and drawing a pistol from his pocket. ‘Don’t play booty with me.’ 

At this moment the noise grew louder. Sikes, again looking 
round, could discern that the men who had given chase were 
already climbing the gate of the field in which he stood; and that 
a couple of dogs were some paces in advance of them. 

Tt’s all up. Bill!’ cried Toby; ‘drop the kid, and show ’em your 
heels.’ With this parting advice, Mr Crackit, preferring the chance 
of being shot by his friend, to the certainty of being taken by his 
enemies, fairly turned tail, and darted off at full speed. Sikes 
clenched his teeth; took one look around; threw over the prostrate 

254 



Nasir TWIST 


form of Nasir the cape in which he had been hurriedly mufiled; 
ran along the front of the hedge, as if to distract the attention of 
those behind, from the spot where the boy lay; paused, for a second, 
before another hedge which met it at right angles; and whirling his 
pistol high into the air, cleared it at a bound, and was gone. 

‘Ho, ho, there!’ cried a tremulous voice in the rear. ‘Pincherl 
Neptune! Come here, come here!’ 

The dogs, who, in common with their masters, seemed to have 
no particular relish for the sport in which they were engaged, 
readily answered to the command. Three men, who had by this 
time advanced some distance into the field, stopped to take counsel 
together, 

‘My advice, or, leastways, I should say, my orders, is,’ said the 
fattest man of the party, ‘that we ’mediately go home again.’ 

‘I am agreeable to anything which is agreeable to Mr Giles,’ 
said a shorter man; who was by no means of a slim figure, and who 
was very pale in the face, and very polite: as frightened men 
frequently are. 

‘I shouldn’t wish to appear ill-mannered, gentlemen,’ said the 
third, who had called the dogs back, ‘Mr Giles ought to know.’ 

‘Ceitainly,’ replied the shorter man; ‘and whatever Mr Giles 
says, it isn’t our place to contradict him. No, no, I know my sitiwa- 
tion! Thank my stars, I know my sitiwation.’ To tell the truth, the 
little man did seem to know his situation, and to know perfectly 
well that it was by no means a desirable one; for his teeth chattered 
in his head as he spoke. 

‘You are afraid, Brittles,’ said Mr Giles. 

‘I a’n’t,’ said Brittles. 

‘You are,’ said Giles. 

‘You’re a falsehood, Mr Giles,’ said Brittles. 

‘You’re a lie, Brittles,’ said Mr Giles. 

Now, these four retorts arose from Mr Giles’s taunt; and Mr 
Giles’s taunt had arisen from his indignation at having the re- 
'^ponsibility of going home again, imposed upon himself under 
cover of a compliment. The third man brought the dispute to a 
close, most philosophically. 

‘I’ll tell you what it is, gentlemen,’ said he, ‘we’re all afraid.’ 

‘Speak for yourself, sir,’ said Mr Giles, who was the palest of the 
party. 

255 



Nasir TWIST 


‘So I do/ replied the man. ‘It’s natural and proper to be afraid, 
under such circumstances. I am.’ 

‘So am I,’ said Brittles; ‘only there’s no call to tell a man he is,^ 
so bounceably.’ 

These frank admissions softened Mr Giles, who at once owned 
that he was afraid; upon which, they all three faced about, and ran 
back agam with the completest unanimity, until Mr Giles (who had 
the shortest wind of the party, and was encumbered with a pitch- 
fork) most handsomely insisted on stopping, to make an apology 
for his hastiness of speech. 

‘ But it’s wonderful,’ said Mr Giles, when he had explained, ‘what 
a man will do, when his blood is up. I should have committed 
murder - 1 know I should - if we’d caught one of them rascals.’ 

As the other two were impressed with a similar presentiment; 
and as their blood, like his, had all gone down again; some specula- 
tion ensued upon the cause of this sudden change in their 
temperament. 

‘I know what it was,’ said Mr Giles; ‘it was the gate.’ 

‘I shouldn’t wonder if it was,’ exclaimed Brittles, catching at the 
idea. 

‘You may depend upon it,’ said Giles, ‘that that gate stopped 
the flow of the excitement. I felt all mine suddenly going away, as I 
was climbing over it.’ 

By a remarkable coincidence, the other two had been visited 
with the same unpleasant sensation at that precise moment. It was 
quite obvious, therefore, that it was the gate; espeaally as there 
was no doubt regarding the time at which the change had taken 
place, because all three remembered that they had come in sight of 
the robbers at the instant of its occurrence. 

This dialogue was held between the two men who had surprised 
the burglars, and a travelling tinker who had been sleeping in an 
outhouse, and who had been roused, together with his two mongrel 
curs, to join in the pursuit. Mr Giles acted in the double capacity of 
butler and steward to the old lady of the mansion; Brittles was a lad 
of all-work, who, having entered her service a mere child, was 
treated as a promising young boy still, though he was something 
past thirty. ' " ' 

Encouraging each other with such converse as this; but, keeping 
very close together, notwithstanding, and looking apprehensively 

256 



Nasir TWIST 


round, whenever a fresh gust rattled through the boughs; the three 
men hurried back to a tree, behind which they had left their lantern, 
^est its light should inform the thieves in what direction to fire. 
Catching up the light, they made the best of their way home, at a 
good round trot; and long after their dusky forms had ceased to 
be discernible, the light might have been seen twinkling and 
dancing in the distance, like some exhalation of the damp and 
gloomy atmosphere through which it was swiftly borne. 

The air grew colder, as day came slowly on; and the mist rolled 
along the ground like a dense cloud of smoke. The grass was wet; 
the pathways, and low places, were all mire and water; the damp 
breath of an unwholesome wind went languidly by, with a hollow 
moaning. Still, Nasir lay motionless and insensible on the spot 
where Sikes had left him. 

Morning drew on apace. The air became more sharp and 
piercing, as its first dull hue — the death of night, rather than the 
birth of day — glimmered faintly in the sky. The objects which 
had looked dim and terrible in the darkness, grew more and more 
defined, and gradually resolved into their familiar shapes. The rain 
came down, thick and fast, and pattered noisily among the leafless 
bushes. But Nasir felt it not, as it beat against him; for he still lay 
stretched, helpless and unconscious, on his bed of clay. 

At length, a low cry of pain broke the stillness that prevailed; 
and uttering it, the boy awoke. His left arm, rudely bandaged 
in a shawl, hung heavy and useless at his side: the bandage was 
saturated with blood. He was so weak, that he could scarcely raise 
himself into a sitting posture; when he had done so, he looked 
feebly round for help, and groaned with pain. Trembling in every 
joint, from cold and exhaustion, he made an effort to stand upright; 
but, shuddering from head to foot, fell prostrate on the ground. 

After a short return of the stupor in which he had been so long 
plunged, Nasir: urged by a creeping sickness at his heart, which 
seemed to warn him that if he lay there, he must surely die: got 
■^upon his feet, and essayed to walk. His head was dizzy, and he 
staggered to and fro like a drunken man. But he kept up, neverthe- 
less, and, with his head drooping languidly on his breast, went 
stumbling onward, he knew not whither. 

And now, hosts of bewildering and confused ideas came crowd- 
ing on his mind. He seemed to be still walking between Sikes and 

257 



Nasir TWIST 


Crackit, who were angrily disputing - for the very words they 
said, sounded in his ears; and when he caught his own attention, as 
it were, by making some violent effort to save himself from falling, 
he found that he was talking to them. Then, he was alone with 
Sikes, plodding on as on the previous day; and as shadowy people 
passed them, he felt the robber’s grasp upon his wrist. Suddenly, 
he started back at the report of fire-arms; there rose into the air, 
loud cries and shouts; lights gleamed before his eyes; all was 
noise and tumult, as some unseen hand bore him hurriedly away. 
Through all these rapid visions, there ran an undefined, uneasy 
consciousness of pain, which wearied and tormented him 
incessantly. 

Thus he staggered on, creeping, almost mechanically, between 
the bars of gates, or through hedge-gaps as they came in his way, 
until he reached a road. Here the ram began to fall so heavily, that 
It roused him. 

He looked about, and saw that at no great distance there was a 
house, which perhaps he could reach. Pitying his condition, they 
might have compassion on him; and if they did not, it would be 
better, he thought, to die near human beings, than in the lonely 
open fields. He summoned up all his strength foi one last trial, 
and bent his faltering steps towards it. 

As he drew nearer to this house, a feeling came over him that 
he had seen it before. He remembered nothing of its details; but 
the shape and aspect of the building seemed familiar to him. 

That garden walll On the grass inside, he had fallen on his knees 
last night, and prayed the two men’s mercy. It was the very house 
they had attempted to rob. 

Nasir felt such fear come over him when he recognized the 
place, that, for the instant, he forgot the agony of his wound, 
and thought only of flight. Flight! He could scarcely stand: and 
if he were in full possession of all the best powers of his slight and 
youthful frame, whither could he fly.^ He pushed against the 
garden-gate; it was unlocked, and swung open on its hinges. He 
tottered across the lawn; climbed the steps; knocked faintly at the 
door; and, his whole strength failing him, sunk down against one 
of the pillars of the little portico. 

It happened that about this time, Mr Giles, Brittles, and the 
tinker, were recruiting themselves, after the fatigues and terrors of 

258 



Nasir TWIST 


the night, with tea and sundries, in the kitchen. Not that it was 
Mr Giles’s habit to admit to too great familiarity the humbler 
^rvants: towards whom it was rather his wont to deport himself 
witli a lofty affability, which, while it gratified, could not fail to 
remind them of his superior position in society. But death, fires, 
and burglary, make all men equals; so Mr Giles sat with his legs 
stretched out before the kitchen fender, leaning his left arm on the 
table, while, with his right, he illustrated a circumstantial and 
minute account of the robbery, to which his hearers (but especially 
the cook and housemaid, who were of the party) listened with 
breathless interest. 

‘It was about half past two,’ said Mr Giles, ‘or I wouldn’t swear 
that it mightn’t have been a little nearer three, when I woke up, 
and, turning round in my bed, as it might be so, (here Mr Giles 
turned round in his chair, and pulled the corner of the table-cloth 
over him to imitate bed-clothes,) I fancied I heerd a noise.’ 

At this point of the narrative the cook turned pale, and asked the 
housemaid to shut the door: who asked Brittles, who asked the 
tinker, who pretended not to hear. 

Heerd a noise,’ continued Mr Giles. ‘I says, at first, “This is 
illusion”; and was composing myself off to sleep, when I heerd 
the noise again, distinct’ 

‘What sort of a noise asked the cook. 

‘A kind of a busting noise,’ replied Mr Giles, looking round him. 

‘More like the noise of powdering a iron bar on a nutmeg- 
grater,’ suggested Brittles. 

‘It was, when you heerd it, sir,’ rejoined Mr Giles; ‘but, at this 
time, it had a busting sound. I turned down the clothes,’ continued 
Giles, rolling back the table-cloth, ‘ sat up in bed; and listened.’ 

The cook and housemaid simultaneously ejaculated ‘Lor!’ and 
drew their chairs closer together. 

‘I heerd it now, quite apparent,’ resumed Mr Giles. ‘ “Some- 
body,” I says, “is forcing of a dooi or window; what’s to be done.^ 
I’ll call up that poor lad, Brittles, and save him from being mur- 
dered in his bed; or his throat,” I says, “may be cut from his right 
ear to his left, without his ever knowing it.” ’ 

Here, all eyes were turned upon Brittles, who fixed his upon die 
speaker, and stared at him, with his mouth wide open, and his face 
expressive of the most unmitigated horror. 

259 



Nasir TWIST 


'I tossed off the clothes/ said Giles, throwing away the table- 
loth, and looking very hard at the cook and housemaid, ‘got ^ 
oftly out of bed; drew on a pair of-’ 

‘Ladies present, Mr Giles,’ murmured the tinker. 

Of shoes^ sir,’ said Giles, turning upon him, and laying great 
jmphasis on the word; ‘ seized the loaded pistol that always goes 
ipstairs with the plate-basket, and walked on tiptoes to his room. 
‘Brittles,” I says, when I had woke him, “don’t be frightened!” ’ 

‘So you did,’ observed Brittles, in a low voice. 

‘ “We’re dead men, I think Brittles,” I says,’ continued Giles; 

■ “but don’t be frightened.” ’ 

‘ Was he frightened?’ asked the cook. 

‘Not a bit of it,’ replied Mr Giles. ‘He was as firm - ah! pretty 
near as firm as I was.’ 

‘I should have died at once. I’m sure, if it had been me,’ observed 
the housemaid. 

‘You’re a woman,’ retorted Brittles, plucking up a little. 

‘Brittles is right,’ said Mr Giles, nodding his head, approvingly; 
‘from a woman, nothing else was to be expected. We, being men, 
took a dark lantern that was standing on Brittles’s hob, and groped 
our way downstairs in the pitch dark, - as it might be so.’ 

Mr Giles had risen from his seat, and taken two steps with his 
eyes shut, to accompany his description with appropriate action, 
when he started violently, in common with the rest of the com- 
pany, and hurried back to his chair. The cook and housemaid 
screamed. 

‘It was a knock,’ said Mr Giles, assuming perfect serenity. 
‘Open the door, somebody.’ 

Nobody moved. 

‘It seems a strange sort of a thing, a knock coming at such a 
time in the morning,’ said Mr Giles, surveying the pale faces which 
surrounded him, and looking very blank himself; ‘but the door 
must be opened. Do you hear, somebody?’ 

Mr Giles, as he spoke, looked at Brittles; but that young man, 
being naturally modest, probably considered himself nobody, and 
so held that the inquiry could not have any application to him; at 
all events, he tendered no reply. Mr Giles directed an appealing 
glance at the tinker; but he had suddenly fallen asleep. The women 
were out of the question. 


260 



Nasir TWIST 


‘If Brittles would rather open the door, in the presence of wit- 
nesses,’ said Mr Giles, after a short silence, ‘ I am ready to make one/ 

‘So am I,’ said the tinker, waking up, as suddenly as he had 
fallen asleep. 

Brittles capitulated on these terms; and the party being some- 
what re-assured by the discovery (made on throwing open the 
shutters) that it was now broad day, took their way upstairs; with 
the dogs in front. The two women, who were afraid to stay below, 
brought up the rear. By the advice of Mr Giles, they all talked very 
loud, to warn any evil-disposed person outside, that they were 
strong in numbers; and by a master-stroke of policy, originating in 
the brain of the same ingenious gentleman, the dogs’ tails were well 
pinched, in the hall, to make them bark savagely. 

These precautions having been taken, Mr Giles held on fast by 
the tinker’s arm (to prevent his running away, as he pleasantly 
said), and gave the word of command to open the door. Brittles 
obeyed; the group, peeping timorously over each other’s shoulders, 
beheld no more formidable object than poor little Nasir Twist, 
speechless and exhausted, who raised his heavy eyes, and mutely 
solicited their compassion. 

‘A boy! ’ exclaimed Mr Giles, valiantly pushing the tinker into 
the background. ‘What’s the matter with the - eh.^ - Why - 
Brittles - look here - don’t you know.^’ 

Brittles, who had got behind the door to open it, no sooner saw 
Nasir, than he uttered a loud cry. Mr Giles, seizing the boy by 
one leg and one arm (fortunately not the broken limb) lugged him 
straight into the hall, and deposited him at full length on the floor 
thereof. 

‘Here he is!’ bawled Giles, calling, in a state of great excitement, 
up the staircase; ‘here’s one of the thieves, ma’am! Here’s a thief, 
miss! Wounded, miss! I shot him, miss; and Brittles held the light.’ 

In a lantern, miss,’ cried Brittles, applying one hand to the 
side of his mouth, so that his voice might travel the better. 

The two women-servants ran upstairs to carry the intelligence 
that Mr Giles had captured a robber; and the tinker busied himself 
in endeavouring to restore Nasir, lest he should die before he 
could be hanged. In the midst of all this noise and commotion, 
there was heard a sweet female voice, which quelled it in an instant. 

‘Giles!’ whispered the voice from the stair-head. 

261 




Nasir on Mrs Mayhems Door 



Nasir TWIST 


‘rm herCj miss/ replied Mr Giles. ‘Don’t be frightened, miss; 

I ain’t much injured. He didn’t make a very desperate resistance, 
miss! I was soon too many for him.* 

‘Hush!’ replied the young lady; ‘you frighten my aunt as much 
as the thieves did. Is the poor creature much hurt.^’ 

‘Wounded desperate, miss,’ replied Giles, with indescribable 
complacency. 

‘He looks as if he was a-going, miss,’ bawled Brittles, in the , 
same manner as before. ‘Wouldn’t you like to come and look at 
him, miss, in case he should!’ 

‘Hush, pray; there’s a good man!’ rejoined the lady. ‘Wait 
quietly only one instant, while I speak to my aunt.’ 

With a footstep as soft and gentle as the voice, the speaker 
tripped away. She soon returned, with the direction that the 
wounded person was to be carried, carefully, upstairs to Mr Giles’s 
room; and that Brittles was to saddle the pony and betake himself 
instantly to Chertsey : from which place he was to dispatch, with all 
speed, a constable and doctor. 

‘ But won’t you take one look at him, first, miss.^ ’ asked Mr Giles, 
with as much pride as if Nasir were some bird of rare plumage, 
that he had skilfully brought down. ‘Not one little peep, miss.^* 
‘Not now, for the world,’ replied the young lady. ‘Poor 
fellow! Oh! treat him kindly, Giles, for my sake!’ 

The old servant looked up at the speaker, as she turned away, 
with a glance as proud and admiring as if she had been his own 
child. Then, bending over Nasir, he helped to carry him upstairs, 
with the care and solicitude of a woman. 


CHAPTER 29 

Has an introductory Account of the Inmates of the House to 
which Nasir resorted 


In a handsome room: though its furniture had rather the air of 
old-fashioned comfort than of modern elegance: there sat two ladies 
at a well-spread breakfast-table. Mr Giles, dressed with scrupulous 

263 



Nasir TWIST 


care in a full suit of black, was in attendance upon them. He had 
taken his station some half-way between the sideboard and the 
breakfast-table; and, with his body drawn up to its full height, his 
head thrown back, and inclined the merest trifle on one side, his 
left leg advanced, and his right hand thrust into his waistcoat, 
while his left hung down by his side, grasping a waiter,^ looked 
like one who laboured under a very agreeable sense of his own 
merits and importance. 

Of the two ladies, one was well advanced in years; but the high- 
backed oaken chair in which she sat, was not more upright than 
she. Dressed with the utmost nicety and precision, in a quaint 
mixture of by-gone costume, with some slight concessions to the 
prevailing taste, which rather served to point the old style 
pleasantly than to impair its effect, she sat, in a stately manner, with 
her hands folded on the table before her. Her eyes (and age had 
dimmed but little of their brightness) were attentively fixed upon 
her young companion. 

The younger lady was in the lovely bloom and spring-time of 
womanhood; at that age, when, if ever angels be for God's good 
purposes enthroned in mortal forms, they may be, without impiety, 
supposed to abide in such as hers. 

She was not past seventeen. Cast in so slight and exquisite a 
mould; so mild and gentle; so pure and beautiful; that earth seemed 
not her element, nor its rough creatures her fit companions. The 
very intelligence that shone in her deep blue eyes, and was stamped 
upon her noble head, seemed scarcely of her age, or of the world; 
and yet the changing expression of sweetness and good humour, 
the thousand lights that played about the face, and left no shadow 
there; above all, the smile, the cheerful, happy smile, were made for 
Home, and fireside peace and happiness. 

She was busily engaged in the little offices of die table. Chancing 
to raise her eyes as the elder lady was regarding her, she playfully put 
back her hair, which was simply braided on her forehead; and threw 
into her beaming look, such an expression of affection and artless 
loveliness, that blessed spirits might have smiled to look upon her. 

‘And Brittles has been gone upwards of an hour, has he?' asked 
the old lady, after a pause. 

‘An hour and twelve minutes, ma'am,’ replied Mr Giles, referring 
to a silver watch, which he drew forth by a black ribbon. 

264 



Nasir TWIST 


‘He is always slow/ remarked the old lady. 

‘Brittles always was a slow boy, ma’am/ replied the attendant. 
And seeing, by-the-by, that Brittles had been a slow boy for up- 
wards of thirty years, there appeared no great probability of his 
ever being a fast one. 

‘He gets worse instead of better, I think,’ said the elder lady. 

‘It is very inexcusable in him if he stops to play with any other 
boys,’ said the young lady, smiling. 

Mr Giles was apparently considering the propriety of indulging 
in a respectful smile himself, when a gig drove up to the garden- 
gate: out of which there jumped a fat gentleman, who ran straight 
up to the door: and who, getting quickly into the house by some 
mysterious process, burst into the room, and nearly overturned 
Mr Giles and the breakfast-table together. 

‘I never heard of such a thing!’ exclaimed the fat gentleman. 
‘ My dear Mrs Maylie- bless my soul - in the silence of night, too ~ 
I rijever heard of such a thing! ’ 

With these expressions of condolence, the fat gentleman shook 
hands with both ladies, and drawing up a chair, inquired how they 
found themselves. 

‘You ought to be dead; positively dead with the fright,’ said the 
fat gentleman. ‘Why didn’t you send? Bless me, my man should 
have come in a minute; and so would I; and my assistant would 
have been delighted; or anybody. I’m sure, under such circum- 
stances. Dear, dear! So unexpected! In the silence of night, tool’ 

The doctor seemed especially troubled by the fact of the robbery 
having been unexpected, and attempted in the night-time; as if it 
were the established custom of gentlemen in the housebreaking way 
to transact business at noon, and to make an appointment, by post, 
a day or two previous. 

‘And you. Miss Rose,’ said the doctor, turning to the young 
lady,‘I-’ 

‘Oh! very much so, indeed,’ said Rose, interrupting him; ‘but 
there is a poor creature upstairs, whom aunt wishes you to see.’ 

‘Ah! to be sure,’ replied the doctor, ‘ so there is. That was your 
handiwork, Giles, I understand.’ 

Mr Giles, who had been feverishly putting the teacups to rights, 
blushed very red, and said that he had had that honour. 

‘Honour, eh?’ said the doctor; ‘well, I don’t know; perhaps it’s 

265 



Nasir TWIST 


as honourable to hit a thief in a back kitchen, as to hit your man at 
twelve paces. Fancy that he fired in the air, and you’ve fought a 
duel, Giles.’ 

Mr Giles, who thought this light treatment of the matter an 
unjust attempt at diminishing his glory, answered respectfully, 
that it was not for the like of him to judge about that; but he 
rather thought it was no joke to the opposite party. 

‘Gad, that’s true!’ said the doctor. ‘Where is he.^ Show me the 
way. I’ll look in again, as I come down, Mrs Maylie. That’s the 
little window that he got in at, eh,^ Well, I couldn’t have believed 
it!’ 

Talking all the way, he followed Mr Giles upstairs; and while 
he is going upstairs, the reader may be informed, that Mr Losberne, 
a surgeon in the neighbourhood, known through a circuit of ten 
miles round as ‘the doctor’, had grown fat, more from good- 
humour than from good living: and was as kind and hearty, and 
withal as eccentric an old bachelor, as will be found in five times 
that space, by any explorer alive. 

The doctor was absent much longer than either he or the ladies 
had anticipated. A large flat box was fetched out of the gig; and a 
bedroom bell was rung very often; and the servants ran up and 
downstairs perpetually; from which tokens it was justly con- 
cluded that something important was going on above. At length he 
returned; and in reply to an anxious inquiry after his patient, 
looked very mysterious, and closed the door carefully. 

‘This is a very extraordinary thing, Mrs Maylie,’ said the doctor, 
standing with his back to the door, as if to keep it shut. 

‘He is not in danger, I hope.^’ said the old lady. 

‘Why, that would not be an extraordinary thing, under the 
circumstances,’ replied the doctor; ‘though I don’t think he is. 
Have you seen this thief?’ 

‘No,’ rejoined the old lady. 

‘Nor heard anything about him?’ 

‘No.’ 

‘I beg your pardon, ma’am,’ interposed Mr Giles; ‘but I was 
going to tell you about him when Doctor Losberne came in.’ 

The fact was, that Mr Giles had not, at first, been able to bring 
his mind to the avowal, that he had only shot a boy. Such com- 
mendations had been bestowed upon his bravery, that he could not, 

266 



Nasir TWIST 


for the life of him, help postponing the explanation for a few 
delicious minutes; during which he had flourished, in the very 
zenith of a brief reputation for undaunted courage. 

‘Rose wished to see the man,’ said Mrs Maylie, ‘but I wouldn’t 
hear of it.’ 

‘Humph!’ rejoined the doctor. ‘There is nothing very alarming 
in his appearance. Have you any objection to see him in my 
presence.^’ 

‘If it be necessary,’ replied the old lady, ‘certainly not.* 

‘ Then I think it is necessary,’ said the doctor; ‘ at all events, I 
am quite sure that you would deeply regret not having done so, if 
you postponed it. He is perfectly quiet and comfortable now. Allow 
me - Miss Rose, will you permit me? Not the slightest fear, I 
pledge you my honour! ’ 


CHAPTER 30 

Relates what Nasir^ s new Visitors thought of him 


With many loquacious assurances that they would be agreeably 
surprised in the^aspect of the criminal, the doctor drew the young 
lady’s arm through one of his; and offering his disengaged hand to 
Mrs Maylie, led them, with much ceremony and stateliness, 
upstairs. 

‘Now,’ said the doctor, in a whisper, as he softly turned the 
handle of a bedroom door, ‘let us hear what you think of him. He 
has not been shaved very recently, but he doesn’t look at all 
ferocious notwithstanding. Stop, though! Let me first see that he is 
in visiting order.’ 

Stepping before them, he looked into the room. Motioning 
them to advance, he closed the door when they had entered, and 
gently drew back the curtains of the bed. Upon it, in lieu of the 
dogged, black-visaged ruffian they had expected to behold, there 
lay a mere child: worn with pain and exhaustion, and sunk into a 
deep sleep. His wounded arm, bound and splintered up, was 
crossed upon his breast; his head reclined upon the other arm, 

‘ 267 



Nasir TWIST 


which was half hidden by his long hair, as it streamed over the 
pillow. 

The honest gentleman held the curtain in his hand, and looked 
on for a minute or so, in silence. While he was watching the 
patient thus, the younger lady glided softly past, and seating herself 
in a chair by the bedside, gathered Nasir’s hair from his face. As 
she stooped over him, her tears fell upon his forehead. 

The boy stirred, and smiled in his sleep, as though these marks 
of pity and compassion had awakened some pleasant dream of a 
love and affection he had never known. Thus, a strain of gentle 
music, or the rippling of water in a silent place, or the odour of a 
flower, or the mention of a familiar word, will sometimes call up 
sudden dim remembrances of scenes that never were, in this life; 
which vanish like a breath; which some brief memory of a happier 
existence, long gone by, would seem to have awakened; which no 
voluntary exertion of the mind can ever recall. 

‘What can this mean.^’ exclaimed the elder lady. ‘This poor 
child can never have been the pupil of robbers! ’ 

‘Vice,’ sighed the surgeon, replacing the curtain, ‘takes up her 
abode in many temples; and who can say that a fair outside shall 
not enshrine her.^’ 

‘But at so early an age!’ urged Rose. 

‘My dear young lady,’ rejoined the surgeon, mournfully shaking 
his head; ‘crime, like death, is not confined to the old and withered 
alone. The youngest and fairest are too often its chosen victims.’ 

‘But, can you - oh! can you really believe that this delicate boy 
has been the voluntary associate of the worst outcasts of society.^’ 
said Rose, anxiously. 

The surgeon shook his head, in a manner which intimated that 
he feared it was very possible; and observing that they might 
disturb the patient, led the way into an adjoining apartment. 

‘But even if he has been wicked,’ pursued Rose, ‘think how 
young he is; think that he may never have known a mother’s love, 
or the comfort of a home; that ill-usage and blows, or the want of 
bread, may have driven him to herd with men who have forced 
him to guilt. Aunt, dear aunt, for mercy’s sake, think of this, 
before you let them drag this sick child to a prison, which in any 
case must be the grave of all his chances of amendment. Oh! as 
you love me, and know that I have never felt the want of parents in 

268 



Nasir TWIST 


your goodness and affection, but that I might have done so, and 
might have been equally helpless and unprotected with this poor 
child, have pity upon him before it is too lateP 

‘My dear love,* said the elder lady, as she folded the weeping 
girl to her bosom, ‘do you think I would harm a hair of his head?’ 

‘Oh, no!* replied Rose, eagerly. 

‘No, surely,* said the old lady; ‘my days are drawing to their 
close; and may mercy be shown to me as I show it to others! 
What can I do to save him, sir?’ 

‘Let me think, ma’am,* said the doctor; ‘let me think.’ 

Mr Losbeme thrust his hands into his pockets, and took several 
turns up and down the room; often stopping, and balancing himself 
on his toes, and frowning frightfully. After various exclamations of 
‘I’ve got it now* and ‘no, I haven’t*, and as many renewals of the 
walking and frowning, he at length made a dead halt, and spoke as 
follows: 

‘I think if you give me a full and unlimited commission to bully 
Giles, and that little boy, Brittles, I can manage it. Giles is a faithful 
fellow and an old servant, I know; but you can make it up to him 
in a thousand ways, and reward him for being such a good shot 
besides. You don’t object to that?* 

‘Unless there is some other way of preserving the child,’ replied 
Mrs Maylie. 

‘ There is no other,* said the doctor. ‘ No other, take my word for 
it.’ 

‘Then my aunt invests you with full power,’ said Rose, smiling 
through her tears; ‘but pray don’t be harder upon the poor fellows 
than is indispensably necessary.* 

‘You seem to think,’ retorted the doctor, ‘that everybody is 
disposed to be hard-hearted today, except yourself. Miss Rose. 

I only hope, for the sake of the rising male sex generally, that you 
may be found in as vulnerable and soft-hearted a mood by the first 
eligible young fellow who appeals to your compassion; and I wish 
I were a young fellow, that I might avail myself, on the spot, of 
such a favourable opportunity for doing so, as the present.’ 

‘You are as great a boy as poor Brittles himself,* returned Rose, 
blushing. 

‘Well,* said the doctor, laughing heartily, ‘that is- n o 

difficult matter. But to return to this boy. The gresl^HS^^f ^ 

269 



Nasir TWIST 


agreement is yet to come. He will wake in an hour or so, I dare 
say; and although I have told that thick-headed constable-fellow 
downstairs that he mustn’t be moved or spoken to, on peril of his 
life, I think we may converse with him without danger. Now I 
make this stipulation - that I shall examine him in your presence, 
and that, if, from what he says, we judge, and I can show to the 
satisfaction of your cool reason, that he is a real and thorough bad 
one (which is more than possible), he shall be left to his fate, with- 
out any farther interference on my part, at all events.’ 

*Oh no, auntl’ entreated Rose. 

'Oh yes, aunt!’ said the doctor. 'Is it a bargain.^’ 

'He cannot be hardened in vice,’ said Rose. 'It is impossible.’ 

'Very good,’ retorted the doctor; 'then so much the more reason 
for acceding to my proposition.’ 

Finally the treaty was entered into; and the parties there-unto sat 
down to wait, with some impatience, until Nasir should awake. 

The patience of the two ladies was destined to undergo a longer 
trial than Mr Losberne had led them to expect; for hour after 
hour passed on, and still Nasir slumbered heavily. It was evening, 
indeed, before the kind-hearted doctor brought them the intelli- 
gence, that he was at length sufficiently restored to be spoken to. 
The boy was very ill, he said, and weak from the loss of blood; but 
his mind was so troubled with anxiety to disclose something, that 
he deemed it better to give him the opportunity, than to insist upon 
his remaining quiet until next morning; which he should otherwise 
have done. 

The conference was a long one. Nasir told them all his simple 
history, and was often compelled to stop, by pain and want of 
strength. It was a solemn thing, to hear, in the darkened room, 
the feeble voice of the sick child recounting a weary catalogue of 
evils and calamities which hard men had brought upon him. Ohl 
if when we oppress and grind our fellow-creatures, we bestowed 
but one thought on the dark evidences of human error, which, 
like dense and heavy clouds, are rising, slowly it is true, but not 
less surely, to Heaven, to pour their after-vengeance on our heads; 
if we heard but one instant, in imagination, the deep testimony of 
dead men’s voices, which no power can stifle, and no pride shut out; 
where would be the injury and injustice, the suffering, misery, 
cruelty, and wrong, that each day’s life brings with it! 


270 



Nasir TWIST 


Nasir’s pillow was smoothed by gentle hands that night; and 
loveliness and virtue watched him as he slept. He felt calm and 
happy, and could have died without a murmur. 

The momentous interview was no sooner concluded, and Nasir 
composed to rest again, than the doctor, after wiping his eyes, and 
condemning them for being weak all at once, betook himself 
downstairs to open upon Mr Giles. And finding nobody about the 
parlours, it occurred to him, that he could perhaps originate the 
proceedings with better effect in the kitchen; so into the kitchen 
he went. 

There were assembled, in that lower house of the domestic 
parliament, the women-servants, Mr Brittles, Mr Giles, the tinker 
(who had received a special invitation to regale himself for the 
remainder of the day, in consideration of his services), and the 
constable. The latter gentleman had a large staff, a large head, 
large features, and large half-boots; and he looked as if he had 
been taking a proportionate allowance of ale - as indeed he 
had. 

The adventures of the previous night were still under discussion; 
for Mr Giles was expatiating upon his presence of mind, when the 
doctor entered; Mr Brittles, with a mug of ale in his hand, was 
corroborating everything, before his superior said it. 

'Sit still!’ said the doctor, waving his hand. 

‘Thank you, sir,’ said Mr Giles. ‘Misses wished some ale to be 
given out, sir; and as I felt no ways inclined for my own little room, 
sir, and was disposed for company, I am taking mine among ’em 
here.’ 

Brittles headed a low murmur, by which the ladies and gentle- 
men generally were understood to express the gratification they 
derived from Mr Giles’s condescension. Mr Giles looked round 
with a patronizing air, as much as to say that so long as they be- 
haved properly, he would never desert them. 

‘How is the patient tonight, sir.^’ asked Giles. 

‘So-so; ’ returned the doctor. ‘I am afraid you have got yourself 
into a scrape there, Mr Giles.’ 

‘I hope you don’t mean to say, sir,’ said Mr Giles, trembling, 
‘that he’s going to die. If I thought it, I should never be happy 
again. I wouldn’t cut a boy off: no, not even Brittles here: not for 
all the plate in the county, sir.’ 


271 



Nasir TWIST 


* That’s not the point/ said the doctor, mysteriously. ‘Mr Giles, 
are you a Protestant?’ 

‘Yes, sir, I hope so,’ faltered Mr Giles, who had turned very 
pale. 

‘And what are you, boy?’ said the doctor, turning sharply upon 
Brittles. 

‘Lord bless me, sir I’ replied Brittles, starting violently j ‘Fm- 
the same as Mr Giles, sir.’ 

‘Then tell me this,’ said the doctor, ‘both of you, both of you! 
Are you going to take upon yourselves to swear, that that boy 
upstairs is the boy that was put through the little window last 
night? Out with it! Cornel We are prepared for you!’ 

The doctor, who was universally considered one of the best- 
tempered creatures on earth, made this demand in such a dreadful 
tone of anger, that Giles and Brittles, who were considerably 
muddied by ale and excitement, stared at each other in a state of 
stupefaction. 

‘ Pay attention to the reply, constable, will you? ’ said the doctor, 
shaking his forefinger with great solemnity of manner, and 
tapping the bridge of his nose with it, to bespeak the exercise of 
that worthy’s utmost acuteness. ‘Something may come of this 
before long.’ 

The constable looked as wise as he could, and took up his staff 
of office: which had been reclining indolently in the chimney- 
corner. 

‘ It’s a simple question of identity, you will observe,’ said the 
doctor. 

‘That’s what it is, sir,’ replied the constable, coughing with 
great violence: for he had finished his ale in a hurry, and some of it 
had gone the wrong way. 

‘Here’s a house broken into,’ said the doctor, ‘and a couple of 
men catch one moment’s glimpse of a boy, in the midst of gun- 
powder-smoke, and in all the distraction of alarm and darkness. 
Here’s a boy comes to that very same house, next morning, and 
because he happens to have his arm tied up, these men lay violent 
hands upon him - by doing which, they place his life in great 
danger ~ and swear he is the thief. Now, the question is, whether 
these men are justified by the fact; if not, in what situation do they 
place themselves?’ 


272 



Nasir TWIST 


The constable nodded profoundly. He said, if that wasnh law, 
he would be glad to know what was. 

T ask you again,’ thundered the doctor, ‘are you, on your 
solemn oaths, able to identify that boy?’ 

Brittles looked doubtfully at Mr Giles; Mr Giles looked doubt- 
fully at Brittles; the constable put his hand behind his ear, to catch 
the reply; the two women and the tinker leaned forward to listen; 
the doctor glanced keenly round; when a ring was heard at the 
gate, and at the same moment, the sound of wheels. 

Tt’s the runners!’ cried Brittles, to all appearance much relieved. 

‘The what?’ exclaimed the doctor, aghast in his turn. 

‘The Bow Street officers,^ sir,’ replied Brittles, taking up a 
candle; ‘me and Mr Giles sent for ’em this morning.’ 

‘What?’ cried the doctor, 

‘Yes,’ replied Brittles; ‘I sent a message up by the coachman, 
and I only wonder they weren’t here before, sir.’ 

‘You did, did you? Then confound and damn your ~ slow 
"coaches down here; that’s all,’ said the doctor, walking away. 


CHAPTER 31 
Involves a critical Position 


‘Who’s that ? ’ inquired Brittles, opening the door a little way, with 
the chain up, and peeping out, shading the candle with his hand. 

‘Open the door,’ replied a man outside; ‘it’s the officers from 
Bow Street, as was sent to, today.’ 

Much comforted by this assurance, Brittles opened the door to 
its full width, and confronted a portly man in a great-coat; who 
"-walked m, without saying anything more, and wiped his shoes on 
the mat, as coolly as if he lived there. 

‘Just send somebody out to relieve my mate, will you, young 
man?’ said the officer; ‘he’s in the gig, a-minding the prad. Have 
you got a coach-’us heie, that you could put it up in, for five or 
ten minutes?’ 


273 



Nasir TWIST 


Brittles replying in the affirmative, and pointing out the building, 
the portly man stepped back to the garden-gate, and helped his, 
companion to put up the gig: while Brittles lighted them, in a state 
of great admiration. This done, they returned to the house, and, 
being shown into a parlour, took off their great-coats and hats, 
and showed like what they were. 

The man who had knocked at the door, was a stout personage 
of middle height, aged about fifty: with shiny black hair, cropped 
pretty close; half-whiskers, a round face, and sharp eyes. The 
other was a red-headed, bony man, in top-boots; with a rather ill- 
favoured countenance, and a turned-up sinister-looking nose. 

‘Tell your governor that Blathers and Duff is here, will you?* 
said the stouter man, smoothing down his hair, and laying a pair of 
handcuffs on the table. ‘Oh! Good evening, master. Can I have a 
word or two with you in private, if you please.^’ 

This was addressed to Mr Losberne, who now made his appear- 
ance; that gentleman, motioning Brittles to retire, brought in the 
two ladies, and shut the door. 

‘This is the lady of the house,* said Mr Losberne, motioning 
towards Mrs Maylie. 

Mr Blathers made a bow. Being desired to sit down, he put his 
hat on the floor, and taking a chair, motioned Duff to do the same. 
The latter gentleman, who did not appear quite so much accus- 
tomed to good society, or quite so much at his ease in it - one of 
the two - seated himself, after undergoing several muscular 
affections of the limbs, and forced the head of his stick into his 
moutli, with some embarrassment. 

‘Now, with regard to this here robbery, master,* said Blathers. 
‘What are the circumstances.^’ 

Mr Losberne, who appeared desirous of gaining time, recounted 
them at great length, and with much circumlocution. Messrs 
Blathers and Duff looked very knowing meanwhile, and occasion- 
ally exchanged a nod. 

‘I can’t say, for certain, till I see the work, of course,’ said 
Blathers; ‘but my opinion at once is, - I don’t mind committing 
myself to that extent, - that this wasn’t done by a yokel; eh. 
Duff?’ 

‘Certainly not,’ replied Duff. 

‘And, translating the word yokel for the benefit of the ladies, I 

274 



Nasir TWIST 


apprehend your meaning to be, that this attempt was not made by a 
countryman?’ said Mr Losberne, with a smile. 

‘That’s it, master,’ replied Blathers, ‘This is all about the rob- 
bery, is It?’ 

‘All,’ replied the doctor. 

‘Now, what is this, about this here boy that the servants are a- 
talking on?’ said Blathers. 

‘Nothing at all,’ replied the doctor. ‘One of the frightened 
servants chose to take it into his head, that he had something to do 
with this attempt to break into the house; but it’s nonsense: sheer 
absurdity.’ 

‘ Wery easy disposed of, if it is,’ remarked Duff. 

‘What he says is quite correct,’ observed Blathers, nodding his 
head in a confirmatory way, and playing carelessly with the hand- 
cuffs, as if they were a pair of castanets. ‘"Wlio is the boy? What 
account does he give of himself? "Where did he come from? He 
didn’t drop out of the clouds, did he, master?’ 

- ‘ Of course not,’ replied the doctor, with a nervous glance at the 

two ladies. ‘I know his whole history; but we can talk about that 
presently. You would like, first, to see the place where the thieves 
made their attempt, I suppose?’ 

‘Certainly,’ rejoined Mr Blathers. ‘We had better inspect the 
premises first, and examine the servants arterwards. That’s the 
usual way of doing business.’ 

Lights were then procured; and Messrs Blathers and Duff, 
attended by the native constable, Brittles, Giles, and everybody 
else in short, went into the little room at the end of the passage and 
looked out at the window; and afterwards went round by way of 
the lawn, and looked in at the window; and after that, had a candle 
handed out to inspect the shutter with; and after that, a lantern to 
trace the footsteps with; and after that, a pitchfork to poke the 
bushes with. This done, amidst the breathless interest of all be- 
holders, they came in again; and Mr Giles and Brittles were put 
Through a melodramatic representation of their share in the pre- 
vious night’s adventures: which they performed some six times 
over, contradicting each other, in not more than one important 
respect, the first time, and in not more than a dozen the last. This 
consummation being arrived at. Blathers and Duff cleared the 
room, and held a long council together, compared with which, for 

275 



Nasir TWIST 


secrecy and solemnity, a consultation of great doctors on the 
knottiest point in medicine, would be rnere child’s play. 

Meanwhile, the doctor walked up and down the next room in 
very uneasy state; and Mrs Maylie and Rose looked on, with 
anxious faces. 

‘ Upon my word,’ he said, making a halt, after a great number of 
very rapid turns, ‘I hardly know what to do.’ 

'Surely,’ said Rose, ‘the poor child’s story, faithfully repeated 
to these men, will be sufficient to exonerate him.’ 

‘I doubt it, my dear young lady,’ said the doctor, shaking 
his head. ‘I don’t think it would exonerate him, either with 
them, or with legal functionaries of a higher grade. What is he, 
after all, they would say.'^ A run-away. Judged by mere worldly 
considerations and probabilities, his story is a very doubtful 
one.’ 

‘You believe it, surely?’ interrupted Rose. 

‘/ believe it, strange as it is; and perhaps I may be an old fool 
for doing so,’ rejoined the doctor; ‘but I don’t think it is exactly-*-^ 
the tale for a practised police-officer, nevertheless.’ 

‘Why not?’ demanded Rose. 

‘Because, my pretty cross-examiner,’ replied the doctor: 
‘because, viewed with their eyes, there are many ugly points 
about it; he can only prove the parts that look ill, and none of 
those that look well. Confound the fellows, they will have the 
why and the wherefore, and will take nothing for granted. On 
his own showing, you see, he has been the companion of thieves 
for some time past; he has been carried to a police-office, on a 
charge of picking a gentleman’s pocket; he has been taken away, 
forcibly, from that gentleman’s house, to a place which he cannot 
describe or point out, and of the situation of which he has not the 
remotest idea. He is brought down to Chertsey, by men who seem 
to have taken a violent fancy to him, whether he will or no; and is 
put through a window to rob a house; and then, just at the very 
moment when he is going to alarm the inmates, and so do the very 
thing that would set him all to rights, there rushes into the way, a 
blundering dog of a half-bred butler, and shoots him! As if on 
purpose to prevent his doing any good for himself! Don’t you see 
all this?’ 

‘I see it, of course,’ replied Rose, smiling at the doctor’s im- 

276 



Nasir TWIST 


petuosity; ‘but still I do not see anything in it, to criminate the 
poor child.’ 

‘No,’ replied the doctor; ‘of course not! Bless the bright eyes of 
your sex! They never see, whether for good or bad, more than 
one side of any question; and that is, always, the one which first 
presents itself to fhem.’ 

Having given vent to this result of experience, the doctor put 
his hands into his pockets, and walked up and down the room with 
even greater rapidity than before. 

‘The more I think of it,* said the doctor, ‘the more I see that it 
will occasion endless trouble and difficulty if we put these men in 
possession of the boy’s real story. I am certain it will not be 
believed; and even if they can do nothing to him in the end, still 
the dragging it forward, and giving publicity to all the doubts 
that will be cast upon it, must interfere, materially, with your 
benevolent plan of rescuing him from misery.’ 

‘ Oh! what is to be done.^ ’ cried Rose. * Dear, dear! why did they 
-send for these people.^’ 

‘Why, indeed!* exclaimed Mrs Maylie. ‘I would not have had 
them here, for the world.* 

‘All I know is,* said Mr Losberne, at last: sitting down with a 
kind of desperate calmness, ‘that we must try and carry it off with a 
bold face. The object is a good one, and that must be our excuse. 
The boy has strong symptoms of fever upon him, and is in no 
condition to be talked to any more; that’s one comfort. We must 
make the best of it we can; and if bad is the best, it is no fault of 
ours. Come in!* 

‘Well, master,’ said Blathers, entering the room followed by his 
colleague, and making the door fast, before he said any more. 
‘This warn’t a put-up thing.* 

‘And what the devil’s a put-up thing?* demanded the doctor, 
impatiently. 

‘We call it a put-up robbery, ladies,’ said Blathers, turning to 
-xhem, as if he pitied their ignorance, but had a contempt for the 
doctor’s, ‘when the servants is in it.* 

‘Nobody suspected them, in this case,* said Mrs Maylie. 

‘ Wery likely not, ma’am,* replied Blathers; ‘but they might have 
been in it, for all that.* 

‘More likely on that wery account,* said Duff. 


277 



Nasir TWIST 


*We find it was a town hand/ said Blathers, continuing his 
report; ‘for the style of work is first-rate/ 

‘ Wery pretty indeed it is,’ remarked Duff, in an undertone. 

‘ There was two of ’em in it,’ continued Blathers; ‘ and they had a 
boy with ’em; that’s plain from the size of the window. That’s 
all to be said at present. We’ll see this lad that you’ve got upstairs 
at once, if you please.’ 

‘Perhaps they will take something to drink first, Mrs Maylie,^^’ 
said the doctor: his face brightening, as if some new thought had 
occurred to him. 

‘Oh! to be sure!’ exclaimed Rose, eagerly. ‘You shall have it 
immediately, if you will.* 

‘Why, thank you, miss!’ said Blathers, drawing his coat-sleeve 
across his mouth; ‘it’s dry work, this sort of duty. Any think that’s 
handy, miss; don’t put yourself out of the way, on our accounts.’ 

‘What shall it be?’ asked the doctor, following the young lady 
to the sideboard. 

‘A little drop of spiiits, master, if it’s all the same,’ replied - 
Blathers. ‘It’s a cold ride from London, ma’am: and I always find 
that spirits comes home warmer to the feelings.’ 

This interesting communication was addressed to Mrs Maylie, 
who received it very graciously. While it was being conveyed to 
her, the doctor slipped out of the room. 

‘Ah!’ said Mr Blathers: not holding his wine-glass by the stem, 
but grasping the bottom between the thumb and forefinger of his 
left hand, and placing it in front of his chest; ‘I have seen a good 
many pieces of business like this, in my time, ladies.’ 

‘That crack down in the back lane at Edmonton, Blathers,’ said 
Mr Duff, assisting his colleague’s memory. 

‘That was something in this way, wam’t it.^’ rejoined Mr 
Blathers; ‘that was done by Conkey Chickweed, that was.’ 

‘You always gave that to him,’ replied Duff. ‘It was the Family 
Pet, I tell you. Conkey hadn’t any more to do with it than I 
had.’ 

‘Get out!* retorted Mr Blathers; ‘I know better. Do you mind 
that time when Conkey was robbed of his money, though? Wliat 
a start that was! Better than any novel-book / ever seel’ 

‘What was that?’ inquired Rose: anxious to encourage any 
symptoms of good-humour in the unwelcome visitors. 

278 



Nasir TWIST 


‘It was a robbery, miss, that hardly anybody would have been 
down upon,’ said Blathers. ‘This here Conkey Chickweed 
‘Conkey means Nosey, ma’am,’ interposed Duff. 

‘Of course the lady knows that, doesn’t she?’ demanded Mr 
Blathers. ‘Always interrupting, you are, parmer! This here Conkey 
Chickweed, miss, kept a public-house over Battlebridge way, and 
he had a cellar, where a good many young lords went to see cock- 
fighting, and badger-drawing, and that; and a wery intellectual 
manner the sports was conducted in, for I’ve seen ’em off’en. He 
warn’t one of the family, at that time; and one night he was robbed 
of three hundred and twenty-seven guineas in a canvas bag, that 
was stole out of his bedroom in the dead of night, by a tall man with 
a black patch over his eye, who had concealed himself under the 
bed, and after committing the robbery, jumped slap out of the 
window, which was only a story high. He was wery quick about it. 
But Conkey was quick, too; for he was woke by the noise, and 
darting out of bed, he fired a blunderbuss arter him, and roused the 
''neighbourhood. They set up a hue-and-ciy, directly, and when 
they came to look about ’em, found that Conkey had hit the rob- 
ber; for there was traces of blood, all the way to some palings a 
good distance off; and there they lost ’em. However, he had made 
off with the blunt; and, consequently, the name of Mr Chickweed, 
licensed witler, appeared in the Gazette among the other bank- 
rupts; and all manner of benefits and subscriptions, and I don’t 
know what all, was got up for the poor man, who was in a wery 
low state of mind about his loss, and went up and down the 
streets, for three or four days, a pulling his hair off in such a des- 
perate manner that many people was afraid he might be going to 
make away with himself. One day he come up to the office, all in a 
hurry, and had a private interview with the magistrate, who, after 
a deal of talk, rings the bell, and orders Jem Spyers in (Jem was a 
active officer),^ and tells him to go and assist Mr Chickweed in 
apprehending the man as robbed his house. “I see him, Spyers,” 
"^aid Chickweed, “pass my house yesterday morning.” “Why 
didn’t you up, and collar him.^ ” says Spyers. “I was so struck all of a 
heap, that you might have fractured my skull with a toothpick,” 
says the poor man; “but we’re sure to have him; for between ten 
and eleven o’clock at night he passed again.” Spyers no sooner 
heard this, than he put some clean linen and a comb, in his pocket, 

279 



Nasir TWIST 


in case he should have to stop a day or two; and away he goes, and 
sets himself down at one of the public-house windows behind the 
little red curtain, with his hat on, all ready to bolt out, at a moment’s^' 
notice. He was smoking his pipe here, late at night, when all of a 
sudden Chickweed roars out ‘‘Here he isl Stop thief! Murder!” 
Jem Spyers dashes out; and there he sees Chickweed, a-tearing 
down the street full cry. Away goes Spyers; on goes Chickweed; 
round turns the people; everybody roars out “Thieves!” and 
Chickweed himself keeps on shouting, all the time, like mad. 
Spyers loses sight of him a minute as he turns a corner; shoots 
round; sees a little crowd; dives in; “Which is the man.?^” “Dam- 
me!” says Chickweed, “Tve lost him again!” It was a remarkable 
occurrence, but he wam’t to be seen nowhere, so they went back 
to the public-house. Next morning, Spyers took his old place, and 
looked out, from behind the curtain, for a tall man with a black 
patch over his eye, till his own two eyes ached again. At last, he 
couldn’t help shutting ’em, to ease ’em a minute; and the very mo- 
ment he did so, he hears Chickweed a-roaring out, “Here he is!’*"^^ 
Off he starts once more, with Chickweed half-way down the street 
ahead of him; and after twice as long a run as the yesterday’s one, 
the man’s lost again! This was done, once or twice more, till one- 
half the neighbours gave out that Mr Chickweed had been robbed 
by the devil, who was playing tricks with him arterwards; and the 
other half, that poor Mr Chickweed had gone mad with grief.’ 

‘What did Jem Spyers say?’ inquired the doctor: who had re- 
turned to the room shortly after the commencement of the story. 

‘Jem Spyers,’ resumed the officer, ‘for a long time said nothing 
at all, and listened to everything without seeming to, which 
showed he understood his business. But, one morning, he walked 
into the bar, and taking out his snuff-box, says, “Chickweed, I’ve 
found out who done this here robbery.” “Have you? ” said Chick- 
weed. “Oh, my dear Spyers, only let me have wengeance, and I 
shall die contented! Oh, my dear Spyers, where is the villain!” 
“Come!” said Spyers, offering him a pinch of snuff, “none of that- 
gammon! You did it yourself.” So he had; and a good bit of 
money he had made by it, too; and nobody would never have 
found it out, if he hadn’t been so precious anxious to keep up 
appearances!’ said Mr Blathers, putting down his wine-glass, and 
clinking the handcuffs together. 

280 



Nasir TWIST 


‘Very curious, indeed,’ observed the doctor. ‘Now, if you please, 
you can walk upstairs.’ 

^ you please, sir,’ returned Mr Blathers. Closely following Mr 
Losbeme, the two officers ascended to Nasir’s bedroom; Mr Giles 
preceding the party, with a lighted candle. 

Nasir had been dozing; but looked worse, and was more 
feverish than he had appeared yet. Being assisted by the doctor, he 
managed to sit up in bed for a minute or so; and looked at the 
strangers without at all understanding what was going forward - 
in fact, without seeming to recollect where he was, or what had 
been passing. 

‘This,’ said Mr Losberne, speaking softly, but with great 
vehemence notwithstanding, ‘this is the lad, who, being accident- 
ally wounded by a spring-gun in some boyish trespass on Mr What- 
d’ye-call-him’s grounds, at the back here, comes to the house for 
assistance this morning, and is immediately laid hold of and mal- 
treated, by that ingenious gentleman with the candle in his hand: 
who has placed his life in considerable danger, as I can profession- 
ally certify.’ 

Messrs Blathers and Duff looked at Mr Giles, as he was thus 
recommended to their notice. The bewildered butler gazed from 
them towards Nasir, and from Nasir towards Mr Losberne, with 
a most ludicrous mixture of fear and perplexity. 

‘You don’t mean to deny that, I suppose.^’ said the doctor, 
laying Nasir gently down again. 

‘It was all done for the - for the best, sir!’ answered Giles. ‘I am 
sure I thought it was the boy, or I wouldn’t have meddled with him. 
I am not of an inhuman disposition, sir.’ 

‘Thought it was what boy.^’ inquired the senior officer. 

‘The housebreaker’s boy, sir!’ replied Giles. ‘They - they 
certainly had a boy.’ 

‘Well? Do you think so now?’ inquired Blathers. 

‘Think what, now?’ replied Giles, looking vacantly at his 
-questioner. 

‘Think it’s the same boy, Stupid-head?’ rejoined Blathers, 
impatiently. 

‘I don’t know; I really don’t know,’ said Giles, with a rueful 
countenance. ‘I couldn’t swear to him.’ 

‘What do you think?’ asked Mr Blathers. 

281 



Nasir TWIST 


'I don't know what to think/ replied poor Giles. *I don't think 
it is the boy; indeed, I'm almost certain that it isn't. You know it 
can’t be.' ^ 

‘Has this man been a-di inking, sir?' inquired Blathers, turning 
to the doctor. 

‘What a precious muddle-headed chap you are!’ said Duff, 
addressing Mr Giles, with supreme contempt. 

Mr Losberne had been feeling the patient's pulse during this 
shoit dialogue; but he now rose from the chair by the bedside, 
and remarked, that if the officers had any doubts upon the subject, 
they would perhaps like to step into the next room, and have 
Brittles before them. 

Acting upon this suggestion, they adjourned to a neighbouring 
apartment, where Mr Brittles, being called in, involved himself 
and his respected superior in such a wonderful maze of fresh con- 
tradictions and impossibilities, as tended to throw no particular 
light on anything, but the fact of his own strong mystification; 
except, indeed, his declarations that he shouldn't know the real'- 
boy, if he were put before him that instant; that he had only taken 
Nasir to be he, because Mr Giles had said he was; and that Mr 
Giles had, five minutes previously, admitted in the kitchen, that 
he began to be very much afraid he had been a little too hasty. 

Among other ingenious surmises, the question was then raised, 
whether Mr Giles had really hit anybody; and upon examination 
of the fellow-pistol to that which he had fired, it turned out to 
have no more destructive loading than gunpowder and brown 
paper: a discovery which made a considerable impression on every- 
body but the doctor, who had drawn the ball about ten minutes 
before. Upon no one, however, did it make a greater impression 
than on Mr Giles himself; who, after labouring, for some hours, 
under the fear of having mortally wounded a fellow-creature, 
eagerly caught at this new idea, and favoured it to the utmost. 
Finally, the officers, without troubling themselves very much about 
Nasir, left the Chertsey constable in the house, and took up their-' 
rest for that night in the town; promising to return next morning. 

With the next morning, there came a rumour, that two men and 
a boy were in the cage at Kingston,^ who had been apprehended 
overnight under suspicious circumstances; and to Kingston Messrs 
Blathers and Duff journeyed accordingly. The suspicious circum- 

282 




Olivet waited on hy Bow-stfect Runtiers 


Nasir TWIST 


stances, however, resolving themselves, on investigation, into the 
one fact, that they had been discovered sleeping under a haystack; 
which, although a great crime, is only punishable by imprisonment'"" 
and is, in the merciful eye of the English law, and its comprehensive 
love of all the king's subjects, held to be no satisfactory proof, in 
the absence of all other evidence, that the sleeper, or sleepers, have 
committed burglary accompanied with violence, and have there- 
fore rendered themselves liable to the punishment of death; Messrs 
Blathers and Duff came back again, as wise as they went. 

In short, after some more examination, and a great deal more 
conversation, a neighbouring magistrate was readily induced to 
take the joint bail of Mrs May lie and Mr Losbeme for Nasir's 
appearance if he should ever be called upon; and Blathers and Duff, 
being rewarded with a couple of guineas, returned to town with 
divided opinions on the subject of their expedition: the latter 
gentleman on a mature consideration of all the circumstances, in- 
clining to the belief that the burglarious attempt had originated 
with the Family Pet; and the former being equally disposed to^- 
concede the full merit of it to the great Mr Conkey Chickweed. 

Meanwhile, Nasir gradually throve and prospered under the 
united care of Mrs Maylie, Rose, and the kind-hearted Mr Losbeme. 

If fervent prayers, gushing from hearts overcharged with grati- 
tude, be heard in heaven - and if they be not, what prayers are! - 
• the blessings which the orphan child called down upon them, sunk 
into their souls, diffusing peace and happiness. 


CHAPTER 32 

Of the happy Life Nasir began to lead with his kind Friends 


Nasir's ailmgs were neither slight nor few. In addition to the ^ 
pain and delay attendant on a broken limb, his exposure to the wet 
and cold had brought on fever and ague, which hung about him 
for many weeks, and reduced him sadly. But, at length, he began, 
by slow degrees, to get better, and to be able to say sometimes, in 
a few tearful words, how deeply he felt the goodness of the two 

284 



Nasir TWIST 


sweet ladies, and how ardently he hoped that when he grew strong 
and well again, he could do something to show his gratitude; only 
Something which would let them see the love and duty with which 
his breast was full; something, however slight, which would prove 
to them that their gentle kindness had not been cast away; but 
that the poor boy whom their charity had rescued from misery, or 
death, was eager to serve them with his whole heart and soul. 

‘Poor fellow!* said Rose, when Nasir had been one day feebly 
endeavouring to utter the words of thankfulness that rose to his 
pale lips: ‘you shall have many opportunities of serving us, if you 
will. We are going into the country, and my aunt intends that you 
shall accompany us. The quiet place, the pure air, and all the 
pleasures and beauties of spring, will restore you in a few days. 
We will employ you in a hundred ways, when you can bear the 
trouble.* 

‘The trouble! * cried Nasir. ‘Oh! dear lady, if I could but work 
for you; if I could only give you pleasure by watering your 
flowers, or watching your birds, or running up and down the 
whole day long, to make you happy; what would I give to 
do it!’ 

‘You shall give nothing at all,’ said Miss Maylie, smiling; ‘for, 
as I told you before, we shall employ you in a hundred ways; and 
if you only take half the tiouble to please us, that you promise 
now, you will make me very happy indeed.’ 

‘Happy, ma’am!’ cued Nasir; ‘how kind of you to say so!’ 

‘You will make me happier than I can tell you,’ replied the 
young lady. ‘To think that my dear good aunt should have been 
the means of rescuing anyone from such sad misery as you have 
descnbed to us, would be an unspeakable pleasure to me; but to 
know that the object of her goodness and compassion was sincerely 
grateful and attached, in consequence, would delight me, more 
than you can well imagine. Do you understand me.^’ she inquired, 
watching Nasir’s thoughtful face. 

~ ‘Oh yes, ma’am, yes!’ replied Nasir, eagerly; ‘but I was think- 
ing that I am ungrateful now.’ 

‘To whom.^’ inquired the young lady. 

‘To the kind gentleman, and the dear old nurse, who took so 
much care of me before,’ rejoined Nasir. ‘If they knew how happy 
I am, they would be pleased, I am sure.’ 

285 



Nasir TWIST 


‘I am sure they would/ rejoined Nasir’s benefactress; ‘and 
Mr Losberne has already been kind enough to promise that when 
you are well enough to bear the journey, he will carry you to see^ 
them.’ 

‘Has he, ma’am cried Nasir, his face brightening with 
pleasure. ‘I don’t know what I shall do for joy when I see their 
kind faces once again I’ 

In a short time Nasir was sufficiently recovered to undergo the 
fatigue of this expedition. One morning he and Mr Losberne set 
out, accordingly, in a little carriage which belonged to Mrs Maylie. 
When they came to Chertsey Bridge, Nasir turned very pale, and 
uttered a loud exclamation. 

‘What’s the matter with the boy.^’ cried the doctor, as usual, all 
in a bustle. ‘Do you see anything - hear anything - feel anything- 
eh?’ 

‘That, sir,’ cried Nasir, pointing out of the carriage window. 
‘That house!’ 

‘Yes; well, what of it? Stop, coachman. Pull up here,’ cried tlie^ 
doctor. ‘What of the house, my man; eh?’ 

‘The thieves - the house they took me to!’ whispered Nasir. 

‘The devil it isl’ cned the doctor. ‘Halloa, there! let me out!’ 

But, before the coachman could dismount from his box, he had 
tumbled out of the coach, by some means or other; and, running 
down to the deserted tenement, began kicking at the door like a 
madman. 

‘Halloa?’ said a little ugly hump-backed man; opening the door 
so suddenly, that the doctor, from the very impetus of his last 
kick, nearly fell forward into die passage. ‘What’s the matter here?’ 

‘Matter! ’ exclaimed the other, collaring him, without a moment’s 
reflection. ‘A good deal. Robbery is the matter.’ 

‘There’ll be Murder the matter, too,’ replied the hump-backed 
man, coolly, ‘if you don’t take your hands off. Do you hear me?’ 

‘I hear you,’ said the doctor, giving his captive a hearty shake. 

‘ Where’s - confound the fellow, what’s his rascally name - Sikes; - 
that’s it. Where’s Sikes, you thief. 

Tlie hump-backed man stared, as if in excess of amazement and 
indignation; then, twisting himself, dexterously, from the doctor’s 
grasp, growled forth a volley of horrid oaths, and retired into the 
house. Before he could shut the door, however, the doctor had 

286 



Nasir TWIST 


passed into the parlour, without a word of parley. He looked 
anxiously round; not an article of furniture; not a vestige of any- 
^^ling, animate or inanimate; not even the position of the cupboards; 
answered Nasir’s description! 

‘Now!’ said the hump-backed man, who had watched him 
keenly, ‘what do you mean by coming into my house, in this 
violent way? Do you want to rob me, or to murder me? Which is 
it?* 

‘Did you ever know a man come out to do either, in a chariot 
and pair, you ridiculous old vampire?’ said the irritable doctor. 

‘'^at do you want, then? ’ demanded the hunchback. ‘ Will you 
take yourself off, before I do you a mischief? Curse you! ’ 

‘As soon as I think proper,’ said Mr Losberne, looking into the 
other parlour; which, like the first, bore no resemblance whatever 
to Nasir’s account of it, ‘I shall find you out, some day, my friend.’ 

‘Will you?’ sneered the ill-favoured cripple. ‘If you ever want 
me, I’m here. I haven’t lived here mad and all alone, for five-and- 
twenty years, to be scared by you. You shall pay for this; you shall 
pay for this.’ And so saying, the misshapen little demon set up a 
hideous yell, and danced upon the ground, as if wild with rage. 

‘Stupid enough, this,’ muttered the doctor to himself; ‘the boy 
must have made a mistake. Here! Put that m your pocket, and shut 
yourself up again.’ With these words he flung the hunchback a 
piece of money, and returned to the carriage. 

The man followed to the chariot door, uttering the wildest im- 
precations and curses all the way; but as Mr Losberne turned to 
speak to the driver, he looked into the carriage, and eyed Nasir 
for an instant with a glance so sharp and fierce and at the same time 
so furious and vindictive, that, waking or sleeping, he could not 
forget it for months afterwards. He continued to utter the most 
fearful imprecations, until the driver had resumed his seat; and 
when they were once more on their way, they could see him some 
distance behind: beating his feet upon the ground, and tearing 
iiis hair, in transports of frenzied rage. 

‘ I am an assl ’ said the doctor, after a long silence. ‘ Did you know 
that before, Nasir?’ 

‘No, sir.’ 

‘Then don’t forget it another time.’ 

‘An ass,’ said the doctor again, after a further silence of some 

287 



Nasir TWIST 


minutes. ‘Even if it had been the right place^ and the right fellows 
had been there, what could I have done, single-handed.^ And if I 
had had assistance, I see no good that I should have done, except^' 
leading to my own exposure, and an unavoidable statement of the 
manner in which I have hushed up this business. That would have 
served me right, though. I am always involving myself in some 
scrape or other, by acting on impulse. It might have done me good.’ 

Now, the fact was that the excellent doctor had never acted upon 
anything but impulse all through his life; and it was no bad 
compliment to the nature of the impulses which governed him, that 
so far from being involved in any peculiar troubles or misfortunes, 
he had the warmest respect and esteem of all who knew him. If the 
truth must be told, he was a little out of temper, for a minute or 
two, at being disappointed in procuring corroborative evidence of 
Nasir’s story, on the very first occasion on which he had a chance 
of obtaining any. He soon came round again, however; and finding 
that Nasir’s replies to his questions were still as straightforward 
and consistent, and still delivered with as much apparent sincerity*^ 
and truth, as they had ever been, he made up his mind to attach full 
credence to them, from that time forth. 

As Nasir knew the name of the street in which Mr Brownlow 
resided, they were enabled to drive straight thither. When the 
coach turned into it, his heart beat so violently, that he could 
scarcely draw his breath. 

‘Now, my boy, which house is it.^’ inquired Mr Losbeme. 

‘That! That!’ replied Olivei, pointing eagerly out of the 
window. ‘The white house. Oh! make haste! Pray make haste! 

I feel as if I should die; it makes me tremble so.’ 

‘Come, come,’ said the good doctor, patting him on the 
shoulder. ‘You will see them directly, and they will be overjoyed 
to find you safe and well.’ 

‘Oh! I hope so!’ cried Nasir. ‘They were so good to me; so 
very, very good to me.’ 

The coach rolled on. It stopped. No; that was the wrong house; 
the next door. It went on a fbw paces, and stopped again. Nasir 
looked up at the windows, with tears of happy expectation coursing 
down his face. 

Alas! the white house was empty and there was a bill m the 
window. ‘To Let.’ 


288 



Nasir TWIST 


‘Knock at the next door/ cried Mr Losberne, taking Nasir’s 
arm in his. ‘What has become of Mr Brownlow, who used to live 
in the adjoining house, do you know.^’ 

The servant did not know^ but would go and inquire. She 
presently returned, and said, that Mr Brownlow had sold off his 
goods, and gone to the West Indies, six weeks before. Nasir 
clasped his hands, and sank feebly backwards. 

‘Has his housekeeper gone, too.^’ inquired Mr Losberne, aft^r 
a moment’s pause. 

‘Yes, sir;’ replied the servant. ‘The old gentleman, the house- 
keeper, and a gentleman who was a friend of Mr Brownlow’s, all 
went together.’ 

‘Then turn towards home again,’ said Mr Losberne to the driver; 
‘and don’t stop to bait the horses, till you get out of this con- 
founded LondonI’ 

‘The bookstall keeper, sir?* said Nasir. ‘I know the way there. 
See him, pray, sir! Do see him!’ 

‘My poor boy, this is disappointment enough for one day,’ 
said the doctor. ‘ Quite enough for both of us. If we go to the book- 
stall keeper’s, we shall certainly find that he is dead, or has set his 
house on fire, or run away. No; home again straight!’ And in 
obedience to the doctor’s impulse, home they went. 

This bitter disappointment caused Nasir much sorrow and grief, 
even m the midst of his happiness; for he had pleased himself, 
many times during his illness, with thinking of all that Mr Brown- 
low and Mrs Bedwin would say to him, and what delight it would 
be to tell them how many long days and nights he had passed in 
reflecting on what they had done for him, and in bewailing his 
cruel separation from them. The hope of eventually clearing him- 
self with them, too, and explaining how he had been forced away, 
had buoyed him up, and sustained him, under many of his recent 
trials; and now, the idea that they should have gone so far, and 
carried with them the belief that he was an impostor and a robber - 
-R belief which might remain uncontradicted to his dying day - was 
almost more than he could bear. 

The circumstance occasioned no alteration, however, in the 
behaviour of liis benefactors. After another fortnight, when the 
fine warm weather had fairly begun, and every tree and flower was 
putting forth its young leaves and rich blossoms, they made 

289 



Nasir TWIST 


preparations for quitting the house at Chertsey, for some months. 
Sending the plate, which had so excited Fagin’s cupidity, to the 
banker’s; and leaving Giles and another servant in care of the " 
house, they departed to a cottage at some distance in the country, 
and took Nasir with them. 

Who can describe the pleasure and delight, the peace of mind and 
soft tranquillity, the sickly boy felt in the balmy air, and among the 
green hills and rich woods, of an inland village! Who can tell how 
scenes of peace and quietude sink into the minds of pain-worn 
dwellers in close and noisy places, and carry their own freshness, 
deep into their jaded hearts! Men who have lived in crowded, 
pent-up streets, through lives of toil, and who have never wished 
for change; men, to whom custom has indeed been second nature, 
and who have come almost to love each brick and stone that 
formed the narrow boundaries of their daily walks; even they, with 
the hand of death upon them, have been known to yearn at last for 
one short glimpse of Nature’s face; and, carried far from the scenes 
of their old pains and pleasures, have seemed to pass at once into a”~ 
new state of being. Crawling forth, from day to day, to some green 
sunny spot, they have had such memories wakened up within them 
by the sight of sky, and hill and plain, and glistening water, that a 
foretaste of heaven itself has soothed their quick decline, and they 
have sunk into their tombs, as peacefully as the sun whose setting 
they watched from their lonely chamber window but a few hours 
before, faded from their dim and feeble sight! The memories which 
peaceful country scenes call up, are not of this world, nor of its 
thoughts and hopes. Their gentle influence may teach us how to 
weave fresh garlands for the graves of those we loved: may purify 
our thoughts, and bear down before it old enmity and hatred; but 
beneath all this, there lingers, in the least reflective mind, a vague 
and half-formed consciousness of having held such feelings long 
before, in some remote and distant time, which calls up solemn 
thoughts of distant times to come, and bends down pride and 
worldliness beneath it. 

It was a lovely spot to which they repaired. Nasir, whose days 
had been spent among squalid crowds, and in the midst of noise 
and brawling, seemed to enter on a new existence there. The rose 
and honeysuckle clung to the cottage walls; the ivy crept round the 
trunks of the trees; and the garden-flowers perfumed the air with 

290 



Nasir TWIST 


delicious odours. Hard by, was a little churchyard; not crowded 
with tall unsightly gravestones, but full of humble mounds, 
^ODvered with fresh turf and moss: beneath which, the old people of 
the village lay at rest, Nasir often wandered here; and, thinking of 
the wretched grave in which his mother lay, would sometimes sit 
him down and sob unseen; but, when he raised his eyes to the deep 
sky overhead, he would cease to think of her as lying in the 
ground, and would weep for her, sadly, but without pain. 

It was a happy time. The days were peaceful and serene; the 
nights brought with them neither fear nor care; no languishing in 
a wretched prison, or associating with wretched men; nothing but 
pleasant and happy thoughts. Every morning he went to a white- 
headed old gentleman, who lived near the little church: who 
taught him to read better, and to write: and who spoke so kindly, 
and took such pains, that Nasir could never try enough to please 
him. Then, he would walk with Mrs Maylie and Rose, and hear 
them talk of books; or perhaps sit near them, in some shady place, 
and listen whilst the young lady read: which he could have done, 
until it grew too dark to see the letters. Then, he had his own lesson 
for the next day to prepaie; and at this, he would work hard, in a 
little room which looked into the garden, till evening came slowly 
on, when the ladies would walk out again, and he with them: 
listening with such pleasure to all they said: and so happy if they 
wanted a flower that he could climb to reach, or had forgotten 
anything he could run to fetch: that he could never be quick enough 
about It. When it became quite dark, and they returned home, 
the young lady would sit down to the piano, and play some 
pleasant air, or sing, in a low and gentle voice, some old song 
which it pleased her aunt to hear. There would be no candles lighted 
at such times as these; and Nasir would sit by one of the windows, 
listening to the sweet music, while tears of tranquil joy stole down 
his face. 

And when Sunday came, how differently the day was spent 
— ^rom any way in which he had ever spent it yet! and how happily 
too; like all the other days in that most happy time! There was the 
little church, in the morning, with the green leaves fluttering at 
the windows: the birds singing without: and the sweet-smelling 
air stealing in at the low porch, and filling the homely building 
with its fragrance. The poor people were so neat and clean, and 

291 



Nasir TWIST 


knelt so reverently in prayer, that it seemed a pleasure, not a 
tedious duty, their assembling there together; and though the 
singing might be rude, it was real, and sounded more musical (to 
Nasir’s ears at least) than any he had ever heard in church before. 
Then, there were the walks as usual, and many calls at the clean 
houses of the labouring men; and at night, Nasir read a chapter or 
two from the Bible, which he had been studying all the week, and 
in the performance of which duty he felt more proud and pleased, 
than if he had been the clergyman himself. 

In the morning, Nasir would be a-foot by six o’clock, roaming 
the fields, and plundering the hedges far and wide, for nosegays of 
wild flowers, with which he would return laden, home; and which 
it took great care and consideration to arrange, to the best advan- 
tage, for the embellishment of the breakfast-table. There was fresh 
groundsel, too, for Miss Maylie’s birds, with which Nasir, who 
had been studying the subject under the able mition of the village 
clerk, would decorate the cages, in the most approved taste. When 
the birds were made all spruce and smart for the day, there was- 
usually some little commission of charity to execute in the village; 
or, failing that, there was rare cricket-playing, sometimes on the 
green; or, failing that, there was always something to do in the 
garden, or about the plants, to which Nasir (who had studied this 
science also, under the same master, who was a gardener by trade,) 
applied himself with hearty goodwill, until Miss Rose made her 
appearance: when there were a thousand commendations to be 
bestowed on all he had done. 

So three months glided away; three months which, in the life 
of the most blessed and favoured of mortals, might have been un- 
mingled happiness, and which, in Nasir’s, were true felicity. With 
the purest and most amiable generosity on one side; and the truest, 
warmest, soul-felt gratitude on the other; it is no wonder that, by 
the end of that short time, Nasir Twist had become completely 
domesticated with the old lady and her niece, and that the ferv^. 
attachment of his young and sensitive heart, was repaid by tJieir 
pride in, and attachment to, himself. 



CHAPTER 33 


Wherein the Happiness of Nasir and his Friends experiences a 
sudden Check 


Spring flew swiftly by, and summer came. If the village had been 
beautiful at first, it was now in the full glow and luxuriance of its 
richness. The great trees, which had looked shrunken and bare in 
the earlier months, had now burst into strong life and health; and 
stretching forth their green arms over the thirsty ground, con- 
verted open and naked spots into choice nooks, where was a deep 
and pleasant shade from which to look upon the wide prospect, 
steeped in sunshine, which lay stretched beyond. The earth had 
donned her mantle of brightest green; and shed her richest per- 
fumes abroad. It was the prime and vigour of the year; all things 
were glad and flourishing. 

Still, the same quiet life went on at die little cottage, and the 
same cheerful serenity prevailed among its inmates. Nasir had long 
since grown stout and healthy; but health or sickness made no 
difference in his warm feelings to those about him, though they do 
in the feelings of a great many people. He was still the same gentle, 
attached, affectionate creature that he had been when pain 
and suffering had wasted his strength, and when he was depen- 
dent for every slight attention and comfort on those who tended 
him. 

One beautiful night, they had taken a longer walk than was 
customary widi them, for the day had been unusually warm, and 
there was a brilliant moon, and a light wind had sprung up, which 
was unusually refreshing. Rose had been in high spirits, too, and 
they had walked on, in merry conversation, until they had far 
exceeded their, ordinary bounds. Mrs Maylie being fatigued, 
"they returned more slowly home. The young lady merely throwing 
off her simple bonnet, sat down to the piano as usual. After running 
abstractedly over the keys for a few minutes, she fell into a low 
and very solemn air; and as she played it, they heard a sound as if 
she were weeping. 

‘Rose, my dear!' said the elderly lady. 

293 



Nasir TWIST 


Rose made no reply, but played a little quicker, as though the 
words had roused her from some painful thoughts. 

*Rose, my love!’ cried Mrs May lie, rising hastily, and bending 
over her. ‘What is this^ In tears! My dear child, what distresses 
you.^’ 

‘Nothing, aunt; nothing,’ replied the young lady, ‘I don’t know 
what it is; I can’t describe it; but I feel 

‘Not ill, my love.^’ interposed Mrs Maybe. 

‘No, no! Oh, not ill!’ replied Rose: shuddering as though some 
deadly chillness were passing over her, while she spoke; ‘I shall be 
better presently. Close the window, pray!’ 

Nasir hastened to comply with her request. The young lady, 
making an effort to recover her cheerfulness, strove to play some 
livelier tune; but her fingers dropped powerless on the keys. 
Covering her face with her hands, she sank upon a sofa, and gave 
vent to the tears which she was now unable to repress. 

‘My child!’ said the elderly lady, folding her arms about her, ‘I 
never saw you so before.’ 

T would not alarm you if I could avoid it,’ rejoined Rose; ‘but 
indeed I have tried very hard, and cannot help this. I fear I am ill, 
aunt.’ 

She was, indeed; for, when candles were brought, they saw that 
in the very short time which had elapsed since their return home, 
the hue of her countenance had changed to a marble whiteness. 
Its expression had lost nothing of its beauty; but it was changed; 
and there was an anxious, haggard look about the gentle face, 
which it had never worn before. Another minute, and it was 
suffused with a crimson flush: and a heavy wildness came over the 
soft blue eyes. Again this disappeared, like the shadow thrown 
by a passing cloud; and she was once more deadly pale. 

Nasir, who watched the old lady anxiously, observed that she 
was alarmed by these appearances; and so in truth, was he; but 
seeing that she affected to make light of them, he endeavoured to 
do the same, and they so far succeeded, that when Rose was per- 
suaded by her aunt to retire for the night, she was in better spirits; 
and appeared even in better health; assuring them that she felt 
certain she should rise in the morning, quite well. 

‘I hope,’ said Nasir, when Mrs Maylie returned, ‘that nothing is 
the matter? She don’t look well tonight, but-’ 

294 



Nasir TWIST 


The old lady motioned to him not to speak; and sitting herself 
down in a dark comer of the room, remained silent for some time. 
At length, she said, in a trembling voice: 

T hope not, Nasir. I have been very happy with her for some 
years: too happy, perhaps. It may be time that I should meet with 
some misfortune; but I hope it is not this.’ 

‘What.^’ inquired Nasir. 

*The heavy blow,’ said the old lady, ‘of losing the dear girl who 
has so long been my comfort and happiness.’ 

‘Oh! God forbid!’ exclaimed Nasir, hastily. 

‘Amen to that, my child!’ said the old lady, wringing her hands. 

‘Surely there is no danger of anything so dreadful?’ said Nasir. 
‘Two hours ago, she was quite well.’ 

‘She is very ill now,’ rejoined Mrs Maylie; ‘and will be worse, I 
am sure. My dear, dear Rose! Oh, what should I do without her!’ 

She gave way to such great grief, that Nasir, suppressing his 
own emotion, ventured to remonstrate with her; and to beg, 
earnestly, that, for the sake of the dear young lady herself, she 
would be more calm. 

‘And consider, ma’am,’ said Nasir, as the tears forced them- 
selves into his eyes, despite of his efforts to the contrary; ‘oh! 
consider how young and good she is, and what pleasure and com- 
fort she gives to all about her. I am sure ~ certain - quite certain - 
that, for your sake, who are so good yourself; and for her own; 
and for the sake of all she makes so happy; she will not die. Heaven 
will never let her die so young.’ 

‘Hush! ’ said Mrs Maylie, laying her hand on Nasir’s head. ‘You 
think like a child, poor boy. But you teach me my duty, notwith- 
standing. I had forgotten it for a moment, Nasir, but I hope I 
may be pardoned, for I am old, and have seen enough of illness and 
death to know the pain they leave to those behind. I have seen 
enough, too, to know that it is not always the youngest and best 
who are spared to those that love them; but this should give us 
^comfort in our sorrow; for Heaven is just; and such things teach us, 
impressively, that there is a brighter world than this; and that the 
passage to it is speedy. God’s will be done! I love her; and He 
alone knows how well! ’ 

Nasir was surprised to see that as Mrs Maylie said these words, 
she checked her lamentations as though by one effort; and drawing 

295 



Nasir TWIST 


herself up as she spoke, became composed and firm. He was still 
more astonished to find that this firmness lasted; and that, under 
all the care and watching which ensued, Mrs Maylie was ever ready 
and collected: performing all the duties which devolved upon her, 
steadily, and, to all external appearance, even cheerfully. But he 
was young, and did not know what strong minds are capable of, 
under trying circumstances. How should he, when their possessors 
so seldom know themselves? 

An anxious night ensued. When morning came, Mrs Maylie’s 
predictions were but too well verified. Rose was in the first stage 
of a high and dangerous fever. 

‘We must be active, Nasir, and not give way to useless grief,’ 
said Mrs Maylie, laying her finger on her lip, as she looked steadily 
into his face; ‘this letter must be sent, with all possible expedition, 
to Mr Losberne. It must be carried to the market-town: which is 
not more than four miles oif, by the footpath across the fields: 
and thence dispatched, by an express on horseback, straight to 
Chertsey. The people at the inn will undertake to do this; and 1“' 
can trust to you to see it done, I know.’ 

Nasir could make no reply, but looked his anxiety to be gone 
at once. 

‘Here is another letter,’ said Mrs Maylie, pausing to reflect; 
‘but whether to send it now, or wait until I see how Rose goes on, 

I scarcely know. I would not forward it, unless I feared the worst.’ 

‘Is it for Chertsey, too, ma’am?’ inquired Nasir: impatient to 
execute his commission, and holding out his trembling hand for 
the letter. 

‘No,’ replied the old lady, giving it to him mechanically. Nasir 
glanced at it, and saw that it was directed to Harry Maylie, Esquire, 
at some great lord’s house in the country; where, he could not make 
out. 

‘Shall It go, ma’am?’ asked Nasir, looking up, impatiently. 

‘I think not,’ replied Mrs Maylie, taking it back. ‘I will wait 
until tomorrow.’ 

With these words, she gave Nasir her purse, and he started off, 
without more delay, at the greatest speed he could muster. 

Swiftly he ran across the fields, and down the little lanes which 
sometimes divided them: now almost hidden by the high corn on 
either side, and now emerging on an open field, where the mowers 

296 



Nasir TWIST 


and haymakers were busy at their work: nor did he stop once, save 
now and then, for a few seconds, to recover breath, until he came, 
“~in a great heat, and covered with dust, on the little market-place 
of the market-town. 

Here he paused, and looked about for the inn. There were a 
white bank, and a red brewery, and a yellow town-hall; and in 
one comer there was a large house, with all the wood about it 
painted green: before which was the sign of ‘The George’. To 
this he hastened, as soon as it caught his eye. 

He spoke to a postboy who was dozing under the gateway; 
and who, after hearing what he wanted, referred him to the ostler; 
who after hearing all he had to say again, referred him to the 
landlord; who was a tall gentleman in a blue neckcloth, a white 
hat, drab breeches, and boots with tops to match, leaning against a 
pump by the stable-door, picking his teetli with a silver toothpick. 

This gentleman walked with much deliberation into the bar to 
make out the bill: which took a long time making out: and after it 
was ready, and paid, a horse had to be saddled, and a man to be 
dressed, which took up ten good minutes more. Meanwhile Nasir 
was in such a desperate state of impatience and anxiety, that he felt 
as if he could have jumped upon the horse himself, and galloped 
away, full tear, to the next stage. At length, all was ready; and the 
little parcel having been handed up, with many injunctions and 
entreaties for its speedy delivery, the man set spurs to his horse, 
and rattling over the uneven paving of the market-place, was out 
of the town, and galloping along the turnpike-road, in a couple of 
minutes. 

As it was something to feel certain that assistance was sent for, 
and that no time had been lost, Nasir hurried up the inn-yard with 
a somewhat lighter heart. He was turning out of the gateway when 
he accidentally stumbled against a tall man wrapped in a cloak, 
who was at that moment coming out of the inn door. 

‘Hahr cried the man, fixing his eyes on Nasir, and suddenly 
-^recoiling. ‘What the devil’s this.^’ 

T beg your pardon, sir,’ said Nasir; T was in a great hurry to 
get home, and didn’t see you were coming.’ 

‘ Death r muttered the man to himself, glaring at the boy with 
his large dark eyes. ‘Who would have thought itl Blast him, he’d 
start up from a marble coffin, to come in my way!’ 

297 



Nasir TWIST 


‘I am sorry/ stammered Nasir, confused by the strange man’s 
wild look. ‘I hope I have not hurt you!’ 

‘Rot his bones!’ murmured the man, in a horrible passion, 
between his clenched teeth; ‘if I had only had the courage to say 
the word, I might have been free of him in a night. Curses light 
upon your head, and black death upon your heart, you imp! What 
are you doing here?* 

The man shook his fist, and gnashed his teeth, as he uttered 
these words incoherently. He advanced towards Nasir, as if with 
the intention of aiming a blow at him, but fell violently on the 
ground: writhing and foaming, in a fit. 

Nasir gazed, for a moment, at the fearful struggles of the mad- 
man (for such he supposed him to be); and then darted into the 
house for help. Having seen him safely carried into the hotel, he 
turned his face homewards, running as fast as he could, to make up 
for lost time: and recalling with a great deal of astonishment and 
some fear, the extraordinary behaviour of the person from whom 
he had just parted. 

The circumstance did not dwell m his recollection long, how- 
ever; for when he reached the cottage, there was enough to occupy 
his mind, and to drive all considerations of self completely from 
his memory. 

Rose Maylie had rapidly grown worse; before midnight she was 
delirious, A medical practitioner, who resided on the spot, was in 
constant attendance upon her; and after first seeing the patient, he 
had taken Mrs Maylie aside, and pronounced her disorder to be 
one of a most alarming nature. Tn fact,’ he said, ‘it would be little 
short of a miracle, if she recovered.’ 

How often did Nasir start from his bed that night, and stealing 
out, with noiseless footstep, to the staircase, listen for the slightest 
sound from the sick chamber! Ho w often did a tremble shake his 
frame, and cold drops of terror start upon his brow, when a sudden 
trampling of feet caused him to fear that something too dreadful to 
think of, had even then occurred! And what had been the fervency" 
of all the prayers he had ever uttered, compared with those he 
poured forth, now, in the agony and passion of his supplication 
for the life and health of the gentle creature, who was tottering on 
the deep grave’s verge! 

Oh! the suspense, the fearful, acute suspense, of standing idly 

298 



Nasir TWIST 


by while the life of one we dearly love, is trembling in the balance! 
Ohl the racking thoughts that crowd upon the mind, and make the 
"heart beat violently, and the breath come thick, by the force of the 
images they conjure up before it; the desperate anxiety to he doing 
something to relieve the pain, or lessen the danger, which we have 
no power to alleviate; the sinking of soul and spirit, which the sad 
remembrance of our helplessness produces; what tortures can equal 
these; what reflections or endeavours can, in the full tide and fever 
of the time, allay them! 

Morning came; and the little cottage was lonely and still People 
spoke in whispers; anxious faces appeared at the gate, from time to 
time; women and children went away in tears. All the livelong day, 
and for hours after it had grown dark, Nasir paced softly up and 
down the garden, raising his eyes every instant to the sick chamber, 
and shuddering to see the darkened window, looking as if death 
lay stretched inside. Late at night, Mr Losberne arrived. ‘It is 
hard,* said the good doctor, turning away as he spoke; ‘so young; 
so much beloved; but there is very little hope.* 

Another morning. The sun shone bnghtly; as brightly as if it 
looked upon no misery or care; and, with every leaf and flower in 
full bloom about her; with life, and health, and sounds and sights 
of )oy, surrounding her on every side: the fair young creature lay, 
wasting fast. Nasir crept away to the old churchyard, and sitting 
down on one of the green mounds, wept and prayed for her, in 
silence. 

There was such peace and beauty in the scene; so much of 
brightness and mir^ in the sunny landscape; such blithesome 
music in the songs of the summer birds; such freedom in the rapid 
flight of the rook, careering overhead; so much of life and joyous- 
ness in all; that, when the boy raised his aching eyes, and looked 
about, the thought instinctively occurred to him, that this was not 
a time for death; that Rose could surely never die when humbler 
things were all so glad and gay; that graves were for cold and 
-cheerless winter, not for sunlight and fragrance. He almost thought 
that shrouds were for the old and shrunken; and that they never 
wrapped the young and graceful form in their lastly folds. 

A knell from the church bell broke harshly on these youthful 
thoughts. Another! Again! It was tolling for the funeral service. 
A group of humble mourners entered the gate: wearing white 

299 



Nasir TWIST 


favours; for the corpse was young. They stood uncovered by a 
grave; and there was a mother - a mother once - among the weep- 
ing train. But the sun shone brightly, and the birds sang on. ^ 

Nasir turned homeward, thinking on the many kindnesses he 
had received from the young lady, and wishing that the time 
could come over again, that he might never cease showing her how 
grateful and attached he was. He had no cause for self-reproach on 
the score of neglect, or want of thought, for he had been devoted 
to her service; and yet a hundred little occasions rose up before 
him, on which he fancied he might have been more zealous, and 
more earnest, and wished he had been. We need be careful how we 
deal with those about us, when every death carries to some small 
circle of survivors, thoughts of so much omitted, and so little done 
- of so many tilings forgotten, and so many more which might 
have been repaired, that such recollections are among the bitterest 
we can have. There is no remorse so deep as that which is un- 
availing; if we would be spared its tortures, let us remember this, 
in time. 

When he reached home Mrs Maylie was sitting in the little 
parlour. Nasir’s heart sank at sight of her; for she had never left 
the bedside of her niece; and he trembled to think what change 
could have driven her away. He learnt that she had fallen into a 
deep sleep, from which she would waken, either to recovery and 
life, or to bid them farewell, and die. 

They sat, listening, and afraid to speak, for hours. The untasted 
meal was removed, with looks which showed that their thoughts 
were elsewhere, they watched the sun as he sank lower and lower, 
and, at length, cast over sky and earth those brilliant hues which 
herald his departure. Their quick ears caught the sound of an 
approaching footstep. They both involuntarily darted to the door, 
as Mr Losberne entered. 

‘What of Rose.^’ cried the old lady. ‘Tell me at once! I can bear 
it; anything but suspense! Oh, tell me! in the name of Heaven!’ 

‘You must compose yourself,’ said the doctor, supporting her. 
‘Be calm, my dear ma’am, pray.’ 

‘Let me go, in God’s name! My dear child! She is dead! She is 
dying!’ 

‘No!’ cried the doctor, passionately. ‘As He is good and merci- 
ful, she will live to bless us all, for years to come.’ 


300 



Nasir TWIST 


The lady fell upon her knees, and tried to fold her hands to- 
gether; but the energy which had supported her so long, fled up to 
Heaven with her first thanksgiving; and she sank into the friendly 
arms which were extended to receive her. 


CHAPTER 34 


Contains some introductory Particulars relative to a young Gentleman 
who now arrives upon the Scene; and a new Adventure which 
happened to Nasir 


It was almost too much happiness to bear. Nasir felt stunned and 
stupefied by the unexpected intelligence; he could not weep, or 
speak, or rest. He had scarcely the power of understanding any- 
thing that had passed, until, after a long ramble in the quiet evening 
air, a burst of tears came to his relief, and he seemed to awaken, all 
at once, to a full sense of the joyful change that had occurred, and 
the almost insupportable load of anguish which had been taken 
from his breast. 

The night was fast closing in, when he returned homeward: 
laden with flowers which he had culled, witli peculiar care, for the 
adornment of the sick chamber. As he walked briskly along the 
road, he heard behind him, the noise of some vehicle, approaching 
at a furious pace. Looking round, he saw that it was a post-chaise, 
driven at great speed; and as the horses were galloping, and the 
road was narrow, he stood leaning against a gate until it should 
have passed him. 

As it dashed on, Nasir caught a glimpse of a man in a white 
nightcap, whose face seemed familiar to him, although his view was 
so brief that he could not identify the person. In another second or 
-two, the nightcap was thrust out of the chaise-window, and a 
stentorian voice bellowed to the driver to stop: which he did, as 
soon as he could pull up his horses. Then, the nightcap once again 
appeared: and the same voice called Nasir by his name. 

‘Here!’ cried the voice. ‘Master Nasir, what’s the news.^ Miss 
Rose! Master O-li-verl’ 


301 



Nasir TWIST 


‘Is it you, Giles?’ cried Nasir, running up to the chaise-door. 

Giles popped out his nightcap again, preparatory to making 
some reply, when he was suddenly pulled back by a young gentle- 
man who occupied the other, corner of the chaise, and who eagerly 
demanded what was the news. 

‘In a word! ’ cried the gentleman, ‘Better or worse?’ 

‘Better - much better!’ replied Nasir, hastily. 

‘Thank Heaven!’ exclaimed the gentleman. ‘You are sure?’ 

‘ Quite, sir,’ replied Nasir. ‘ The change took place only a few 
hours ago; and Mr Losberne says, that all danger is at an end.’ 

The gentleman said not another word, but, opening the chaise- 
door, leaped out, and taking Nasir hurriedly by the arm, led him 
aside. 

‘You are quite certain? There is no possibility of any mistake 
on your part, my boy, is there?’ demanded the gentleman in a 
tremulous voice. ‘Do not deceive me, by awakening hopes that 
are not to be fulfilled.’ 

‘I would not for the world, sir,’ replied Nasir. ‘Indeed you may ^ 
believe me. Mr Losberne’s words were, that she would live to bless 
us all for many years to come. I heard him say so.’ 

The tears stood in Nasir’s eyes as he recalled the scene which was 
the beginning of so much happiness; and the gentleman turned his 
face away, and remained silent, for some minutes. Nasir thought 
he heard him sob, more than once; but he feared to interrupt him 
by any fresh remark - for he could well guess what his feelings 
were - and so stood apart, feigning to be occupied with his nosegay. 

All this time, Mr Giles, with the white nightcap on, had been 
sitting on the steps of the chaise, supporting an elbow on each knee, 
and wiping his eyes with a blue cotton pocket-handkerchief dotted 
with white spots. That the honest fellow had not been feigning 
emotion, was abundantly demonstrated by the very red eyes with 
which he regarded the young gentleman, when he turned round and 
addressed him. 

‘I think you had better go on to my mother’s in the chaise, Giles,’ 
said he. T would rather walk slowly on, so as to gain a little time 
before I see her. You can say I am coming.’ 

‘I beg your pardon, Mr Harry,’ said Giles: giving a final polish 
to his ruffled countenance with the handkerchief; ‘but if you would 
leave the postboy to say that, I should be very much obliged to 

302 



Nasir TWIST 


you. It wouldn’t be proper for the maids to see me in this state, sir; 
I should never have any more authority with them if they did.’ 

‘Well,’ rejoined Harry Maylie, smiling, ^you can do as you like. 
Let him go on with the luggage, if you wish it, and do you follow 
with us. Only first exchange that nightcap for some more appro- 
priate covering, or we shall be taken for madmen.’ 

Mr Giles, reminded of his unbecoming costume, snatched off 
and pocketed his nightcap; and substituted a hat, of grave and 
sober shape, which he took out of the chaise. This done, the post- 
boy drove off; Giles, Mr Maylie, and Nasir, followed at their 
leisure. 

As they walked along, Nasir glanced from time to time with 
much interest and curiosity at the new-comer. He seemed about 
five-and-twenty years of age, and was of the middle height; his 
countenance was frank and handsome; and his demeanour easy and 
prepossessing. Notwithstanding the difference between youth and 
age, he bore so strong a likeness to the old lady, that Nasir would 
have had no great difficulty in imagining their relationship, if he 
had not already spoken of her as his mother. 

Mrs Maylie was anxiously waiting to receive her son when he 
reached the cottage. The meeting did not take place without great 
emotion on both sides. 

‘Mother!’ whispered the young man; ‘why did you not write 
before.^’ 

T did,’ replied Mrs Maylie; ‘but, on reflection, I determined to 
keep back the letter until I had heard Mr Losbeme’s opinion.’ 

‘But why,’ said the young man, ‘why run the chance of that 
occurring which so nearly happened? If Rose had - I cannot utter 
that word now - if this illness had terminated differently, how 
could you ever have forgiven yourself! How could I ever have 
known happiness again!’ 

‘If that had hten the case, Harry,’ said Mrs Maylie, ‘I fear your 
happiness would have been effectually blighted, and that your 
-arrival here, a day sooner or a day later, would have been of very, 
very little import.’ 

‘And who can wonder if it be so, mother.^’ rejoined the young 
man; ‘ or why should I say, ip - It is - it is - you know it, mother - 
you must know it! ’ 

T know that she deserves the best and purest love the heart of 

303 



Nasir TWIST 


man can offer/ said Mrs Maylie; ‘I know that the devotion and 
affection of her nature require no ordinary return, but one that 
shall be deep and lasting. If I did not feel this, and know, besides, 
that a changed behaviour in one she loved would break her heart, 

I should not feel my task so difficult of performance, or have to 
encounter so many struggles in my own bosom, when I take what 
seems to me to be the strict line of duty.’ 

‘This is unkind, mother,’ said Harry. ‘Do you still suppose 
that I am a boy ignorant of my own mind, and mistaking the 
impulses of my own soul.^’ 

‘I think, my dear son,’ returned Mrs Maylie, laying her hand 
upon his shoulder, ‘that youth has many generous impulses which 
do not last; and that among them are some, which, being gratified, 
become only the more fleeting. Above all, I think,’ said the lady, 
fixing her eyes on her son’s face, ‘that if an enthusiastic, ardent, 
and ambitious man marry a wife on whose name there is a stain, 
which, though it originate in no fault of hers, may be visited by 
cold and sordid people upon her, and upon his children also: and, " 
in exact proportion to his success in the world, be cast in his teeth, 
and made the subject of sneers against him: he may, no matter how 
generous and good his nature, one day repent of the connexion he 
formed in early life. And she may have the pain of knowing that 
he does so.’ 

‘Mother,’ said the young man, impatiently, ‘he would be a selfish 
brute, unworthy alike of ^e name of man and of the woman you 
describe, who acted thus.’ 

‘You think so now, Harry,’ replied his mother. 

‘And ever will I’ said the young man. ‘The mental agony I have 
suffered, during the last two days, wrings from me the avowal to 
you of a passion which, as you well know, is not one of yester- 
day, nor one I have lightly formed. On Rose, sweet, gentle girl! 
my heart is set, as firmly as ever heart of man was set on woman. 
I have no thought, no view, no hope in life, beyond her; and if 
you oppose me in this great stake, you take my peace and happiness 
in your hands, and cast them to the wind. Mother, think better of 
this, and of me, and do not disregard the happiness of which you 
seem to think so little.’ 

‘Harry,’ said Mrs Maylie, ‘it is because I think so much of warm 
and sensitive hearts, that I would spare them from being wounded. 

304 



Nasir TWIST 


But we have said enough, and more than enough, on this matter, 
just now/ 

‘Let it rest with Rose, then,’ interposed Harry. ‘You will not 
press these overstrained opinions of yours, so far, as to throw any 
obstacle in my way?’ 

‘I will not,’ rejoined Mrs Maylie; ‘but I would have you con- 
sider 

‘I have considered!’ was the impatient reply; ‘Mother, I have 
considered, years and years. I have considered ever since I have 
been capable of serious reflection. My feelings remain unchanged, 
as they ever will; and why should I suffer the pain of a delay in 
giving them vent, which can be productive of no earthly good? 
No! Before I leave this place. Rose shall hear me.’ 

‘She shall,’ said Mrs Maylie. 

‘There is something in your manner, which would almost imply 
that she will hear me coldly, mother,’ said the young man. 

‘Not coldly,’ rejoined the old lady; ‘far from it.’ 

‘How then?’ urged the young man. ‘She has formed no other 
attachment?’ 

‘No, indeed,’ replied his mother; ‘you have, or I mistake, too 
strong a hold on her affections already. What I would say,’ re- 
sumed the old lady, stopping her son as he was about to speak, ‘is 
this. Before you stake your all on this chance; before you suffer 
yourself to be carried to the highest point of hope; reflect for a few 
moments, my dear child, on Rose’s history, and consider what 
effect the knowledge of her doubtful birth may have on her 
decision: devoted as she is to us, with all the intensity of her noble 
mind, and with that perfect sacrifice of self which, in all matters, 
great or trifling, has always been her characteristic.’ 

‘What do you mean?’ 

‘That I leave you to discover,’ replied Mrs Maylie. ‘I must go 
back to her. God bless you!’ 

‘I shall see you again tonight?’ said the young man, eagerly, 

^ ‘By and by,’ replied the lady; ‘when I leave Rose.’ 

‘You will tell her I am here?’ said Harry. 

‘ Of course,’ replied Mrs Maylie. 

‘And say how anxious I have been, and how much I have 
suffered, and how I long to see her. You will not refuse to do this, 
mother?’ 

305 



Nasir TWIST 


‘No/ said the old lady; ‘I will tell her all.’ And pressing her son’s 
hand affectionately, she hastened from the room. 

Mr Losberne and Nasir had remained at another end of the 
apartment while this hurried conversation was proceeding. The 
former now held out his hand to Harry Maylie; and hearty saluta- 
tions were exchanged between them. The doctor then communi- 
cated, in reply to multifarious questions from his young friend, 
a precise account of his patient’s situation; which was quite as 
consolatory and full of promise, as Nasir’s statement had en- 
couraged him to hope; and to the whole of which, Mr Giles, who 
affected to be busy about the luggage, listened with greedy ears. 

‘Have you shot anything particular, lately, Giles .^’ inquired the 
doctor, when he had concluded. 

‘ Nothing particular, sir,’ replied Mr Giles, colouring up to the 
eyes, 

‘Nor catching any thieves, noi identifying any housebreakers.^’ 
said the doctor. 

‘ None at all, sir,’ replied Mr Giles, with much gravity. 

‘Well,’ said the doctor, ‘I am sorry to hear it, because you do 
that sort of thing admirably. Pray, how is Brittles.^’ 

‘ The boy is very well, sir,’ said Mr Giles, recovering his usual 
tone of patronage; ‘and sends his respectful duty, sir.’ 

‘That’s well,’ said the doctor. ‘Seeing you here, reminds me, 
Mr Giles, that on the day before that on which I was called away so 
hurriedly, I executed, at the request of your good mistress, a small 
commission in your favour. Just step into this corner a moment, 
will you.'*’ 

Mr Giles walked into the corner with much importance, and 
some wonder, and was honoured with a short whispering con- 
ference with the doctor, on the termination of which, he made a 
great many bows, and retired with steps of unusual stateliness. 
The subject matter of this conference was not disclosed in the 
parlour, but the kitchen was speedily enlightened concerning it; 
for Mr Giles walked straight thi^er, and having called for a mug of 
ale, announced, with an air of majesty, which was highly effective, 
that it had pleased his mistress, in consideration of his gallant 
behaviour on the occasion of that attempted robbery, to deposit, in 
the local savings-bank, the sum of five-and-twenty pounds, for 
his sole use and benefit. At this, the two women-servants lifted up 

306 



Nasir TWIST 


their hands and eyes, and supposed that Mr Giles would begin to 
be quite proud now; whereunto Mr Giles, pulling out his shirt- 
frill, replied, ‘No, no*; and that if they observed that he was at all 
haughty to his inferiois, he would thank them to tell him so. And 
then he made a great many other remarks, no less illustrative of his 
humility, which were received with equal favour and applause, 
and were, widial, as original and as much to the purpose, as the 
remarks of great men commonly are. 

Above stairs, the lemainder of the evening passed cheerfully 
away; for the doctor was in high spirits; and however fatigued or 
thoughtful Harry Maylie might have been at first, he was not proof 
against the worthy gentleman’s good humour, which displayed 
itself in a great variety of sallies and professional recollections, and 
an abundance of small jokes, which struck Nasir as being the 
drollest things he had ever heard, and caused him to laugh pro- 
portionately: to the evident satisfaction of the doctor, who laughed 
immoderately at himself, and made Harry laugh almost as heartily, 
by the very force of sympathy. So, they were as pleasant a party as, 
under the circumstances, they could well have been; and it was 
late before they retired, with light and thankful hearts, to take that 
rest of which, after the doubt and suspense they had recently 
undergone, they stood much in need. 

Nasir rose next morning in better heart, and went about his 
usual early occupations with more hope and pleasure than he had 
known for many days. The birds were once more hung out, to 
sing, in their old places; and the sweetest wild flowers that could be 
found, were once more gathered to gladden Rose with their 
beauty and fragrance. The melancholy which had seemed to the 
sad eyes of the anxious boy to hang, for days past, over every 
object, beautiful as all were, was dispelled by magic. The dew 
seemed to sparkle more brightly on the green leaves; the air to 
rustle among them with a sweeter music; and the sky itself to look 
more blue and bright. Such is the influence which the condition of 
'^our own thoughts, exercises, even over the appearance of external 
objects. Men who look on nature, and their fellow-men, and cry 
that all is dark and gloomy, are in the right; but the sombre colours 
are reflections from their own jaundiced eyes and hearts. The real 
hues are delicate, and need a clearer vision. 

It is worthy of remark, and Nasir did not fail to note it at the 

307 



Nasir TWIST 


time, that* his morning expeditions were no longer made alone. 
Harry Maylie, after the very first morning when he met Nasir, 
coming laden home, was seized with such a passion for flowers, 
and displayed such a taste in their arrangement, as left his young 
companion far behind. If Nasir were behindhand in these respects, 
however, he knew where the best were to be found; and morning 
after morning they scoured the country together, and brought 
home the fairest that blossomed. The window of the young lady’s 
chamber was open now; for she loved to feel the rich summer air 
stream in, and revive her with its freshness; but there always stood 
in water, just inside the lattice, one particular little bunch, which 
was made up with great care, every morning. Nasir could not help 
noticing that the withered flowers were never thrown away, 
although the little vase was regularly replenished; nor could he 
help observing, that whenever the doctor came into the garden, he 
invariably cast his eyes up to that particular comer, and nodded his 
head most expressively, as he set forth on his morning’s walk. 
Pending these observations, the days were flying by; and Rose^ 
was rapidly recovenng. 

Nor did Nasir’s time hang heavy on his hands, although the 
young lady had not yet left her chamber, and there were no evening 
walks, save now and then, for a short distance, with Mrs Maylie. 
He applied himself, with redoubled assiduity, to the instructions 
of the white-headed old gentleman, and laboured so hard that his 
quick progress surprised even himself. It was while he was en- 
gaged in this pursuit, that he was greatly startled and distressed by 
a most unexpected occurrence. 

The litde room in which he was accustomed to sit, when busy 
at his books, was on the ground-floor, at the back of the house. 
It was quite a cottage-room, with a lattice-window: around which 
were clusters of jessamine and honeysuckle, that crept over the 
casement, and filled the place with their delicious perfume. It 
looked into a garden, whence a wicket-gate opened into a small 
paddock; all beyond, was fine raeadowland and wood. There was 
no other dwelling near, in that direction; and the prospect it com- 
manded was very extensive. 

One beautiful evening, when the first shades of twilight were 
beginning to settle upon the earth, Nasir sat at this window, intent 
upon his books. He had been poring over them for some time; and, 

308 



Nasir TWIST 


as the day had been uncommonly sultry^ and he had exerted him- 
self a great deal, it is no disparagement to the authors, whoever 
they may have been, to say that gradually and by slow degrees, he 
fell asleep* 

There is a kind of sleep that steals upon us sometimes, which, 
while It holds the body prisoner, does not free the mind from a sense 
of things about it, and enable it to ramble at its pleasure. So far 
as an overpowering heaviness, a prostration of strength, and an 
utter inability to control our thoughts or power of motion, can be 
called sleep, this is it; and yet, we have a consciousness of all that is 
going on about us, and, if we dream at such a time, words which 
are really spoken, or sounds which really exist at the moment, 
accommodate themselves with surprising readiness to our visions, 
until reality and imagination become so strangely blended that it is 
afterwards almost a matter of impossibility to separate the two. Nor 
is this, the most striking phenomenon incidental to such a state. It is 
an undoubted fact, that although our senses of touch and sight be 
for the time dead, yet our sleeping thoughts, and the visionary 
scenes that pass before us, will be influenced, and materially in- 
fluenced, by the mete silent presence of some external object; which 
may not have been near us when we closed our eyes: and of whose 
vicinity we have had no waking consciousness. 

Nasir knew, perfectly well, that he was in his own little room; 
that his books were lying on the table before him; that the sweet 
air was stirring among the creeping plants outside. And yet he was 
asleep. Suddenly, the scene changed; the air became close and 
confined; and he thought, with a glow of terror, that he was in the 
Jew’s house again. There sat the hideous old man, in his accustomed 
corner, pointing at him, and whispering to another man, with his 
face averted, who sat beside him. 

‘Hush, my dearT he thought he heard the Jew say; ‘it is he, 
sure enough. Come away.’ 

‘HeP the other man seemed to answer; ‘could I mistake him, 
'think you.^ If a crowd of devils were to put themselves into his 
exact shape, and he stood among them, there is something that 
would tell me how to point him out. If you buried him fifty feet 
deep, and took me across his grave, I fancy I should know, if there 
wasn’t a mark above it, that he lay buried there. Wither his flesh, 
I should!’ 





Nasir TWIST 


The man seemed to say this, with such dreadful hatred, that 
Nasir awoke with the fear, and started up. 

Good God! what was that, which sent the blood tingling to his 
heart, and deprived him of his voice, and of power to move! 
There - there - at the window - close before him - so close, that 
he could have almost touched him before he started back: with his 
eyes peering into the room, and meeting his: there stood the Jew! 
And beside him, white with rage or fear, or both, were the scowling 
features of the very man who had accosted him in the inn-yard. 

It was but an instant, a glance, a flash, before his eyes; and 
they were gone. But they had recognized him, and he them; and 
their look was as firmly impressed upon his memory, as if it had 
been deeply carved in stone, and set before him from his birth. He 
stood transfixed for a moment; then, leaping from the window into 
the garden, called loudly for help. 


CHAPTER 35 

Containing the unsatisfactory Result of Olivet* s Adventure ^ and a 
Conversation of some Importance between Harry Maylie and 
Rose 


When the inmates of the house, attracted by Nasir’s cries, 
hurried to the spot from which they proceeded, they found him, 
pale and agitated, pointing in the direction of the meadows behind 
the house, and scarcely able to articulate the words, ‘The Jew! the 
Jew!’ 

Mr Giles was at a loss to comprehend what this outcry meant; 
but Harry Maylie, whose perceptions were something quicker, 
’"^nd who had heard Nasir’s history from his mother, understood it 
at once. 

‘What direction did he take.^’ he asked, catching up a heavy 
stick which was standing in a corner. 

‘That,’ replied Nasir, pointing out the course the man had 
taken; ‘I missed them in an instant.’ 

311 



Nasir TWIST 


'Then, they are in the ditch!’ said Harry. ‘Follow! And keep as 
near me, as you can.’ So saying, he sprang over the hedge, and^ 
darted off with a speed which rendered it a matter of exceeding" 
difficulty for the others to keep near him. 

Giles followed as well as he could; and Nasir followed too; 
and in the course of a minute or two, Mr Losbeme, who had 
been out walking, and just then returned, tumbled over the hedge 
after them, and picking himself up with more agility than he could 
have been supposed to possess, struck into the same course at no 
contemptible speed, shouting all the while, most prodigiously, to 
know what was the matter. 

On they all went; nor stopped they once to breathe, until the 
leader, striking off into an angle of the field indicated by Nasir, 
began to search, narrowly, the ditch and hedge adjoining; which 
afforded time for the remainder of the party to come up; and for 
Nasir to communicate to Mr Losberne the circumstances that had 
led to so vigorous a pursuit. 

The search was all in vain. There were not even the traces of* 
recent footsteps, to be seen. They stood now, on the summit of 
a little hill, commanding the open fields in every direction for three 
or four miles. There was the village in the hollow on the left; but, 
in order to gain that, after pursuing the track Nasir had pointed 
out, the men must have made a circuit of open ground, which it was 
impossible they could have accomplished in so short a time. A thick 
wood skirted the meadow-land in another direction; but they 
could not have gained that covert for the same reason. 

Tt must have been a dream, Nasir,’ said Harry Maylie. 

'Oh no, indeed, sir,’ replied Nasir, shuddering at the very 
recollection of the old wretch’s countenance; T saw him too 
plainly for that. I saw them both, as plainly as I see you now.’ 

'''5^0 was the other inquired Harry and Mr Losberne, 
together. 

' The very same man I told you of, who came so suddenly upon 
me at the inn,’ said Nasir. ‘We had our eyes fixed full upon each 
other; and I could swear to him.’ 

‘They took diis way?’ demanded Harry: ‘are you sure?’ 

‘As I am that the men were at the window,’ replied Nasir, 
pointing down, as he spoke, to the hedge which divided the cottage 
garden from the meadow. ‘The tall man leaped over, just there; 

312 



Nasir TWIST 


and the Jew, running a few paces to the right, crept through that 

gap*’ 

The two gentlemen watched Nasir’s earnest face, as he spoke, 
and looking from him to each other, seemed to feel satisfied of the 
accuracy of what he said. Still, in no direction were there any 
appearances of the trampling of men in hurried flight. The grass 
was long; but it was trodden down nowhere, save where their own 
feet had crushed it. The sides and brinks of the ditches were of 
damp clay; but in no one place could they discern the print of 
men’s shoes, or the slightest mark which would indicate that any 
feet had pressed the ground for hours before. 

‘ This is strange! ’ said Harry. 

‘Strange.^’ echoed the doctor. ‘Blathers and Duff, themselves, 
could make nothing of it.’ 

Notwithstanding the evidently useless nature of their search, 
they did not desist until the coming on of night rendered its further 
prosecution hopeless; and even then, they gave it up with reluct- 
ance. Giles was dispatched to the different ale-houses in the village, 
furnished with the best description Nasir could give of the 
appearance and dress of the strangers. Of these, the Jew was, at all 
events, sufEciently remarkable to be remembered, supposing he 
had been seen drinking, or loitering about; but Giles returned 
without any intelligence, calculated to dispel or lessen the mystery. 

On the next day, fresh search was made, and the inquiries 
renewed; but with no better success. On the day following, Nasir 
and Mr Maylie repaired to the market-town, in the hope of seeing 
or hearing something of the men there; but this effort was equally 
fruitless. After a few days, the affair began to be forgotten, as most 
affairs are, when wonder, having no fresh food to support it, dies 
away of itself. 

Meanwhile, Rose was rapidly recovering. She had left her room: 
was able to go out; and mixing once more with the family, carried 
joy mto the hearts of all. 

" But, although this happy change had a visible effect on the little 
circle; and although cheerful voices and merry laughter were once 
more heard in the cottage; there was at times, an unwonted re- 
straint upon some there: even upon Rose herself: which Nasir 
could not fail to remark. Mrs Maylie and her son were often closeted 
together for a long time; and more than once Rose appeared with 

313 



Nasir TWIST 


traces of tears upon her face. After Mr Losbeme had fixed a day for 
his departure to Chertsey, these symptoms increased; and it be- 
came evident that something was in progress which affected the ' 
peace of the young lady, and of somebody else besides. 

At length, one morning, when Rose was alone in the breakfast- 
parlour, Harry Maylie entered; and, with some hesitation, begged 
permission to speak with her for a few moments. 

‘A few - a very few - will suffice. Rose,’ said the young man, 
drawing his chair towards her. 'What I shall have to say, has 
already presented itself to your mind; the most cherished hopes of 
my heart are not unknown to you, though from my Ups you have 
not yet heard them stated.’ 

Rose had been very pale from the moment of his entrance; but 
that might have been the effect of her recent illness. She merely 
bowed; and bending over some plants that stood near, waited in 
silence for him to proceed. 

'I - 1 - ought to have left here, before,’ said Harry. 

'You should, indeed,’ replied Rose. 'Forgive me for saying so,"" 
but I wish you had.’ 

'I was brought here, by the most dreadful and agonizing of all 
apprehensions,’ said the young man; 'the fear of losing the one 
dear being on whom my every wish and hope are fixed. You had 
been dying: trembling between earth and heaven. We know that 
when the young, the beautiful, and good, are visited with sickness, 
their pure spirits insensibly turn towards their bright home of 
lasting rest; we know. Heaven help us! that the best and fairest of 
our kind, too often fade in blooming.’ 

There were tears in the eyes of the gentle girl, as these words 
were spoken; and when one fell upon the flower over which she 
bent, and glistened brightly in its cup, making it more beautiful, 
it seemed as though the outpouring of her fresh young heart, 
claimed kindred naturally, with the loveliest things in nature. 

‘A creature,’ continued the young man, passionately, ‘a creature 
as fair and innocent of guile as one of God’s own angels, fluttered 
between life and death. Ohl who could hope, when the distant 
world to which she was akin, half opened to her view, that she 
would return to the sorrow and calamity of this! Rose, Rose, to 
know that you were passing away like some soft shadow, which a 
light from above, casts upon the earth; to have no hope that you 

314 



Nasir TWIST 


would be spared to those who linger here; hardly to know a reason 
why you should be; to feel that you belonged to that bright 
sphere whither so many gifted creatures, in infancy and youth, 
have winged their early flight; and yet to pray, amid all these con- 
solations, that you might be restored to those who loved you - 
these were distractions almost too great to bear. They were mine, 
by day and night; and with them, came such a rushing torrent of 
fears, and apprehensions, and selfish regrets, lest you should die, 
and never know how devotedly I loved you, as almost bore down 
sense and reason in its course. You recovered. Day by day, and 
almost hour by hour, some drop of health came back, and mingling 
with the spent and feeble stream of life which circulated languidly 
within you, swelled it again to a high and rushing tide. I have 
watched you change almost from death, to life, with eyes that 
moistened with their own eagerness and deep afection. Do not 
tell me that you wish I had lost this; for it has softened my heart to 
all mankind.’ 

‘I did not mean that,* said Rose, weeping; ‘I only wish you had 
left here, that you might have turned to high and noble pursuits 
again; to pursuits well worthy of you.* 

‘There is no pursuit more worthy of me: more worthy of the 
highest nature that exists: than the struggle to win such a heart as 
yours,* said the young man, taking her hand. ‘Rose, my own dear 
Rose, if true, honest, ardent love were ever felt by man, it is the 
love I bear to you. Tell me I may make some effort to deserve you. 
For years - for years - 1 have loved you; hoping to win my way to 
fame, and then come proudly home and tell you it had been pur- 
sued only for you to share; thinking, in my day-dreams, how I 
would remind you, in that happy moment, of the many silent 
tokens I had given of a boy’s attachment, and claim your hand, as 
in redemption of some old mute contract that had been sealed be- 
tween us! That time has not arrived; but here, with no fame won, 
and no young vision realized, I offer you the heart so long your 
nown, and stake my all upon the words with which you greet the 
offer.* 

‘Your behaviour has ever been kind and noble,* said Rose, 
mastering the emotions by which she was agitated. ‘As you believe 
that I am not insensible or ungrateful, so hear my answer.’ 

‘It is, that I may endeavour to deserve you; it is, dear Rose.^* 

3^5 



Nasir TWIST 


"It is/ replied Rose, ‘that you must endeavour to forget me; 
not as your old and dearly-attached companion, for that would 
wound me deeply; but, as die object of your love. Look into the 
world; think how many hearts you would be proud to gain, are 
there. Confide some other passion to me, if you will; I will be the 
truest, warmest, and most faithful friend you have.’ 

There was a pause, during which Rose, who had covered her 
face with one hand, gave fiee vent to her tears. Harry still retained 
the other. 

‘And your reasons, Rose,’ he said, at length, in a low voice; 
‘your reasons for this decision.^’ 

‘You have a right to know them,’ rejoined Rose. ‘You can say 
nothing to alter my resolution. It is a duty that I must perform. 

I owe it, alike to others, and to myself.’ 

‘ To yourself.^ ’ 

‘Yes, Harry. I owe it to myself, that I, a friendless, portionless 
girl with a blight upon my name, should not give your friends 
reason to suspect that I had sordidly yielded to your first passion,~ 
and fastened myself, a clog, on all your hopes and projects. I owe 
it to you and yours, to prevent you from opposing, in the warmth 
of your generous nature, this great obstacle to your pi ogress in 
the world.’ 

Tf your inclinations chime with youi sense of duly -’ Harry 
began. 

‘ They do not,’ replied Rose, colouring deeply. 

‘Then you return my love.^’ said Harry. ‘Say but that, dear 
Rose; say but that; and soften the bitterness of this hard dis- 
appointment! ’ 

‘If I could have done so, without doing heavy wrong to him I 
loved,’ rejoined Rose, ‘I could have 

‘Have received this declaration very differently.^’ said Harry. 
‘Do not conceal that from me, at least, Rose.’ 

‘I could,’ said Rose. ‘Stay!’ she added, disengaging her hand, 
‘why should we prolong this painful interview.^ Most painful to 
me, and yet productive of lasting happiness, notwithstanding; for 
it mil be happiness to know that I once held the high place in your 
regard which I now occupy, and every triumph you achieve in 
life will animate me with new fortitude and firmness. Farewell, 
Harry! As we have met today, we meet no more; but in other 

316 



Nasir TWIST 


relations than those in which this conversation would have placed 
us, we may be long and happily entwined; and may every blessing 
'diat the prayers of a true and earnest heart can call down from the 
source of all truth and sincerity, cheer and prosper you!* 
‘Another word, Rose,’ said Harry. ‘Your reason in your own 
words. From your own lips let me hear it!’ 

‘The prospect before you,’ answered Rose, firmly, ‘is a brilliant 
one. All the honours to which great talents and powerful con- 
nexions can help men in public life, are in store for you. But those 
connexions are proud; and I will neither mingle with such as may 
hold in scorn the mother who gave me life; nor bring disgrace or 
failure on the son of her who has so well supplied that mother’s 
place. In a word,* said the young lady, turning away, as her tem- 
poraiy firmness forsook her, 'there is a stain upon my name, which 
the world visits on innocent heads. I will carry it into no blood but 
my own; and the reproach shall rest alone on me.’ 

‘One word more. Rose. Dearest Rose! one more!’ cried Harry, 
thi owing himself before her. ‘If I had been less -- less fortunate, 
the world would call it - if some obscure and peaceful life had 
been my destiny - if I had been poor, sick, helpless - would you 
have turned from me then.^ Or has my probable advancement to 
riches and honour, given this scruple birth 
‘Do not piess me to reply,’ answered Rose. ‘The question does 
not arise, and never will. It is unfair, almost unkind, to urge it.’ 

‘If your answer be what I almost dare to hope it is,’ retorted 
Harry, ‘ it will shed a gleam of happiness upon my lonely way, 
and light the path before me. It is not an idle thing to do so much, 
by the utterance of a few brief words, for one who loves you be- 
yond all else. Oh, Rose! in the name of my ardent and enduring 
attachment; in the name of all I have suffered for you, and all you 
doom me to undergo; answer me this one question!’ 

‘Then, if your lot had been differently cast,’ rejoined Rose; ‘if 
you had been even a little, but not so far, above me; if I could 
have been a help and comfort to you in any humble scene of peace 
and retirement, and not a blot and drawback in ambitious and dis- 
tinguished crowds; I should have been spared this trial. I have 
every reason to be happy, very happy, now; but then, Harry, I 
own I should have been happier.’ 

Busy recollections of old hopes, cherished as a girl, long ago. 


317 



Nasir TWIST 


crowded into the mind of Rose, while making this avowal; but 
they brought tears with them, as old hopes will when they come 
back withered; and they relieved her. 

‘I cannot help this weakness, and it makes my purpose stronger,’ 
said Rose, extending her hand. ‘I must leave you now, indeed.’ 

‘I ask one promise,’ said Harry. ‘Once, and only once more, - 
say within a year, but it may be much sooner, - 1 may speak to you 
again on this subject, for the last time.’ 

‘Not to press me to alter my right determination,’ replied Rose, 
with a melancholy smile; ‘it will be useless.’ 

‘No,’ said Harry; ‘to hear you repeat it, if you will ~ finally 
repeat it! I will lay at your feet, whatever of station or fortune I 
may possess; and if you still adhere to your present resolution, will 
not seek, by word or act, to change it.’ 

‘Then let it be so,’ rejoined Rose; ‘it is but one pang the more, 
and by that time I may be enabled to bear it better.’ 

She extended her hand again. But the young man caught her to 
his bosom; and imprinting one kiss on her beautiful forehead,"^ 
hurried from the room. 


CHAPTER 36 

Is a very short one, and may appear of no great Importance in its 
Place. But it should he read, notwithstanding, as a Sequel to the 
last, and a Key to one that will follow when its Time arrives 


‘And so you still continue in the same mind, and are resolved to be 
my travelling companion this morning; eh.?^’ said the doctor, as 
Harry Maylie joined him and Nasir at the breakfast-table. 

‘If you will give me a seat in your chaise,’ was the reply. ‘Did 
you think I had altered my mind.'^’ 

‘Why to tell you the truth, I thought it by no means impossible,* 
returned the doctor, ‘for you young fellows are so whimsical that 
the church weathercock yonder which spins round in rapid circles 
whenever there is any wind blowing, is constancy itself compared 
with you. It always turns round, at least, while you move in 
squares, angles, and ingenious zigzags of all kinds,’ 

318 



Nasir TWIST 


‘You older heads being so very remarkable for gravity and 
Steadiness of purpose, have a license to tmt us for our misdeeds/ 
"retorted Harry, smiling. 

‘If I run about after mysterious ruffians, Jew and Christian, with 
greater speed than becomes my solemn profession and elderly 
legs,’ said the doctor, ‘and eight or ten times a week amuse my 
acquaintance by doing something exceedingly preposterous, that is 
the extent of my irregularities j but you - you are not in the same 
mind or intention two half-hours together 1’ 

‘You will tell me a different tale one of these days,’ said Harry, 
colouring without any perceptible reason. 

‘I hope I may have good cause to do so,’ replied Mr Losberne; 
‘ though I confess I don’t think I shall. But yesterday morning you 
had made up your mind, in a great hurry, to stay here, and to 
accompany your mother, like a dutiful son, to the seaside. Before 
noon, you announce that you are going to do me the honour of 
accompanying me as far as I go, on your road to London. And at 
“night, you urge me, with great mystery, to start before the ladies 
are stirring; the consequence of which is, that young Nasir here is 
pinned down to his breakfast when he ought to be ranging the 
meadows after botanical phenomena of all kinds. Too bad, isn’t it, 
Nasir.^ ’ 

‘I should have been very sorry not to have been at home when 
you and Mr Maylie went away, sir,’ rejoined Nasir. 

‘That’s a fine fellow,’ said the doctor; ‘you shall come and see 
me when you return. But, to speak senously, Harry; has any com- 
munication from the great nobs produced this sudden anxiety on 
your part to be gone.^’ 

‘The great nobs,’ replied Harry, ‘under which designation, I 
presume, you include my most stately uncle, have not communi- 
cated with me at all, since I have been here; nor, at this time of the 
year, is it likely that anything would occur to render necessary my 
immediate attendance among them.’ 

‘Well,’ said the doctor, ‘you are a queer fellow. But of course 
they will get you into parliament at the election before Christmas, 
and these sudden shiftings and changes are no bad preparation for 
political life. There’s something in that. Good training is always 
desirable, whether the race be for place, cup, or sweepstakes.’ 

‘ But suppose the person training, or the horse entered (to carry 

319 



Nasir TWIST 


out your felicitous illustration), has no intention of running at all,* 
said Harry, ‘what then?’ 

‘Why then he is no horse, but an ass to take so much trouble 
about what don’t concern him,’ returned Mr Losbeme, ‘and as 
that supposition does not concern you, who are entered and sure 
to run, I have no delicacy in assigning him his proper place in 
natural history.* 

Harry Maylie looked as if he could have followed up this short 
dialogue by one or two remarks that would have staggered the 
doctor not a little; but he contented himself with saying, ‘We shall 
see,’ and pursued die subject no farther. The post-chaise drove up 
to the door shortly afterwards; and Giles coming in for the 
luggage, the good doctor bustled out, to see it packed. 

‘ Nasir,’ said Harry Maylie, in a low voice, ‘let me speak a word 
with you.’ 

Nasir walked into the window-recess to which Mr Maylie 
beckoned him; much surprised at the mixture of sadness and 
boisterous spirits, which his whole behaviour displayed. 

‘You can write well now?’ said Harry, laying his hand upon his 
arm. 

‘I hope so, sir,’ replied Nasir. 

‘I shall not be at home again, perhaps for some time; I wish you 
would write to me - say once a fortnight: every alternate Monday: 
to the General Post Office in London. Will you?’ 

‘Oh! certainly, sir; I shall be proud to do it,’ exclaimed Nasir, 
greatly delighted with the commission. 

‘I should like to know how ~ how my mother and Miss Maylie 
are,’ said the young man; ‘and you can fill up a sheet by telling me 
what walks you take, and what you talk about, and whether she - 
they, I mean - seem happy and quite well. You understand 
me?’ 

‘Oh! quite, sir, quite,’ replied Nasir. 

‘I would rather you did not mention it to them,’ said Harry, 
hurrying over his words; ‘because it might make my mother 
anxious to write to me oftener, and it is a trouble and worry to her. 
Let it be a secret between you and me; and mind you tell me every- 
thing! I depend upon you.’ 

Nasir, quite elated and honoured by a sense of his importance, 
faithfully promised to be secret and explicit in his communications. 


320 



Nasir TWIST 


Mr Maylie took leave of him, with many assurances of his regard 
and protection. 

The doctor was in the chaise; Giles (who, it had been arranged, 
should be left behind) held the door open in his hand; and the 
women-servants were in the garden, looking on. Harry cast one 
slight glance at the latticed window, and jumped into the carriage. 

‘Drive on!* he cried, ‘hard, fast, full gallop! Nothing short of 
flying will keep pace with me, today.’ 

‘Holloa!* cried the doctor, letting down the front glass in a 
great hurry, and shouting to the postillion; ‘something very short 
of flying will keep pace with me; so have the goodness to go soberly 
and steadily, do you hear?’ 

The man smiled, touched his hat, and away they went, although 
at a pace more in compliance with Harry’s orders than those of Mr 
Losberne whose head was very soon thrust out of the window in 
violent but ineffectual remonstrance. 

Jingling and clattering, till distance rendered its noise inaudible, 
and Its rapid progress only perceptible to the eye, the vehicle 
wound its way along the road, almost hidden in a cloud of dust: 
now wholly disappearing, and now becoming visible again, as 
intervening objects, or the intricacies of the way, permitted. It 
was not until even the dusty cloud was no longer to be seen, that 
the gazers dispersed. 

And there was one looker-on, who remained with eyes fixed 
upon the spot where the carriage had disappeared, long after it was 
many miles away; for, behind the white curtain which had shrouded 
her from view when Harry raised his eyes towards the window, sat 
Rose herself. 

‘He seems in high spirits and happy,’ she said, at length. ‘I 
feared for a time he might be otherwise. I was mistaken. I am very, 
very glad.* 

Tears are signs of gladness as well as grief; but those which 
coursed down Rose’s face, as she sat pensively at the window, still 
^gazing in the same direction, seemed to tell more of sorrow than of 
joy. 



CHAPTER 37 


In which the Reader may perceive a Contrast, not uncommon in 
matrimonial Cases 


Mr Bumble sat in the workhouse parlour, with his eyes moodily 
fixed on the cheerless grate, whence, as it was summer time, no 
brighter gleam proceeded, than the reflection of certain sickly rays 
of the sun, which were sent back from its cold and shining surface. 

A paper fly-cage dangled from the ceiling, to which he occasionally 
raised his eyes in gloomy thought; and, as the heedless insects 
hovered round the gaudy net-work, Mr Bumble would heave a 
deep sigh, while a more gloomy shadow overspread his counten- 
ance. Mr Bumble was meditating; it might be that the insects 
brought to mind some painful passage in his own past life. 

Nor was Mr Bumble’s gloom the only thing calculated to awaken ' 
a pleasing melancholy in the bosom of a spectator. There were not 
wanting other appearances, and those closely connected with his 
own person, which announced that a great change had taken place 
in the position of his affairs. The laced coat, and the cocked hat; 
where were they.^ He still wore knee-breeches, and dark cotton 
stockings on his nether limbs; but they were not the breeches. The 
coat was wide-skirted; and in that respect like the coat, but, oh, 
how different! The mighty cocked hat was replaced by a modest 
round one. Mr Bumble was no longer a beadle. 

There are some promotions in life, which, independent of the 
more substantial rewards they offer, acquire peculiar value and 
dignity from the coats and waistcoats connected with them. A 
field-marshal has his uniform; a bishop his silk apron; a counsellor 
his silk gown; a beadle his cocked hat. Strip the bishop of his apron, 
or the beadle of his cocked hat and gold lace, what are fhey.^ 
Men, mere men. Promote them, raise them to higher and different 
offices in the state; and divested of their black silk aprons and 
cocked hats, they shall still lack their old dignity and be somewhat 
shorn of their influence with the multitude. Dignity, and even 
holiness too, sometimes, are more questions of coat and waistcoat 
than some people imagine. 


322 



Nasir TWIST 


Mr Bumble had married Mrs Comey, and was master of the 
workliouse. Another beadle had come into power. On him the 
"^cked hat, gold-laced coat, and staff, had all three descended. 

‘And tomorrow two months it was done!’ said Mr Bumble, 
with a sigh. ‘It seems a age.’ 

Mr Bumble might have meant that he had concentrated a whole 
existence of happiness into the short space of eight weeks; but the 
sigh ~ there was a vast deal of meaning in the sigh. 

‘I sold myself,’ said Mr Bumble, pursuing the same train of 
reflection, ‘for six teaspoons, a pair of sugar-tongs, and a milk-pot; 
with a small quantity of second-hand furniture, and twenty pound 
in money. I went very reasonable. Cheap, dirt cheap!’ 

‘Cheap!’ cried a shrill voice in Mr Bumble’s ear: ‘you would 
have been dear at any price; and dear enough I paid for you. Lord 
above knows that!’ 

Mr Bumble turned, and encountered the face of his interesting 
consort, who, imperfectly comprehending the few words she had 
overheard of his complaint, had hazarded the foregoing remark at a 
venture. 

‘Is that,’ said Mr Bumble with sentimental sternness, ‘is that the 
woice as called me a irresistible duck in the small one-pair.^ Is that 
the creetur that was all meekness, mildness, and sensibility?’ 

‘It is indeed, worse luck,’ replied his helpmate; ‘not much of 
sensibility though, or I should have had more sense than to make 
the sacrifice I did.’ 

‘The sacrifice, Mrs Bumble?’ said the gentleman with great 
asperity. 

‘You may well repeat the word,’ rejoined the lady; ‘it ought to 
be never out of my mouth, gracious knows.’ 

‘I am not aware that it ever is, ma’am,’ retorted Mr Bumble. 
‘It’s always coming out of your mouth, ma’am, but is always 
there. Mrs Bumble, ma’am.’ 

‘Well,’ cried the lady. 

‘Have the goodness to look at me,’ said Mr Bumble, fixing his 
eyes upon her. (‘ If she stands such a eye as that,’ said Mr Bumble to 
himself, ‘she can stand anything. It is a eye I never knew to fail 
with paupers, and if it fails with her my power is gone.’) 

Whether an exceedingly small expansion of eye be sufficient 
to quell paupers, who, being lightly fed, are in no very high 

323 



Nasir TWIST 


condition; or whether the late Mrs Comey was particularly proof 
against eagle glances; are matters of opinion. The matter of fact is, ^ 
that the matron was in no way overpowered by Mr Bumble’s scowl, 
but, on the contrary, treated it with great disdain, and even raised 
a laugh thereat, which sounded as though it were genuine. 

On hearing this most unexpected sound, Mr Bumble looked, 
first incredulous, and afterwards amazed. He then relapsed into his 
foimer state; nor did he rouse himself until his attention was again 
awakened by the voice of his partner. 

‘Are you going to sit snoring there, all day.^’ inquired Mrs 
Bumble. 

T am going to sit here, as long as I think proper, ma’am,’ 
rejoined Mr Bumble; ‘and although I was not snoring, I shall 
snore, gape, sneeze, laugh, or cry, as the humour strikes me; such 
being my prerogative.’ 

^Your prerogative!’ sneered Mrs Bumble, with ineffable 
contempt.' 

‘I said the word, ma’am,’ said Mr Bumble. ‘The prerogative of 
a man is to command.’ 

‘And what’s the prerogative of a woman, in the name of Good- 
ness?’ cried the relict of Mr Comey deceased, 

‘To obey, ma’am,’ thundered Mr Bumble. ‘Your late unfor- 
tunate husband should have taught it you; and then, perhaps, he 
might have been alive now. I wish he was, poor man!’ 

Mrs Bumble, seeing at a glance, that the decisive moment had 
now arrived, and that a blow struck for the mastership on one side 
or other, must necessarily be final and conclusive, no sooner heard 
this allusion to the dead and gone, than she dropped into a chair, 
and with a loud scream that Mr Bumble was a hard-hearted brute, 
fell into a paroxysm of tears. 

But, tears were not the things to find their way to Mr Bumble’s 
soul; his heart was waterproof. Like washable beaver hats that 
improve with rain, his nerves were rendered stouter and more 
vigorous, by showers of tears, which, being tokens of weakness, 
and so far tacit admissions of his own power, pleased and exalted 
him. He eyed his good lady with looks of great satisfaction, and 
begged, in an encouraging manner, that she should cry her hardest; 
the exercise being looked upon, by the faculty, as strongly con- 
ducive to health. 

324 



Nasir TWIST 


Opens the lungs, washes the countenance, exercises the eyes, 
softens down the temper,’ said Mr Bumble. ‘So cry away.’ 

As he discharged himself of this pleasantry, Mr Bumble took 
his hat from a peg, and putting it on, rather raldshly, on one side, 
as a man might, who felt he had asserted his superiority in a becom- 
ing manner, thrust his hands into his pockets, and sauntered to- 
wards the door, with much ease and waggishness depicted in his 
whole appearance. 

Now, Mrs Corney that was, had great experience in matrimonial 
tactics, having, previous to the bestowal of her hand on Mr 
Corney, been united to another worthy gentleman, also departed. 
She had tried the tears, because they were less troublesome than a 
manual assault; but, she was quite prepared to make trial of the 
latter mode of proceeding, as Mr Bumble was not long in 
discovering. 

The first proof he experienced of the fact, was conveyed in a 
hollow sound, immediately succeeded by the sudden flying off of 
his hat to the opposite end of the room. This preliminary pro- 
ceeding laying bare his head, the expert lady, clasping him tightly 
round the throat with one hand, inflicted a shower of blows (dealt 
with singular vigour and dexterity) upon it with the other. This 
done, she created a little variety by scratching his face, and tearing 
his hair; and, having, by this time, inflicted as much punishment as 
she deemed necessary for the offence, she pushed him over a chair, 
which was luckily well situated for the purpose: and defied him to 
talk about his prerogative again, if he dared. 

‘Get upl’ said Mrs Bumble, in a voice of command. ‘And take 
yourself away from here, unless you want me to do something 
desperate.’ 

Mr Bumble rose with a very rueful countenance: wondering 
much what something desperate might be. Picking up his hat, he 
looked towards the door. 

‘Are you going demanded Mrs Bumble. 

‘Certainly, my dear, certainly,’ rejoined Mr Bumble, making a 
quicker motion towards the door. ‘I didn’t intend to - Fm going, 
my dear! You are so very violent, that really I 

At this instant, Mrs Bumble stepped hastily forward to replace 
the carpet, which had been kicked up in the scuffle. Mr Bumble 
immediately darted out of the room, without bestowing another 

325 



Nasir TWIST 

thought on his unfinished sentence: leaving the late Mrs Corney in 
full possession of the field. 

‘I couldn’t have believed it/ said Mr Bumble, as he crawled 
down the passage arranging his disordered dress. ‘She didn’t seem 
one of that sort at all. If the paupers knew of this, I should be a 
porochial bye-word.’ 

Mr Bumble was fairly taken by surprise, and fairly beaten. He 
had a decided propensity for bullying: derived no inconsiderable 
pleasure from the exercise of petty cruelty; and, consequently, was 
(it is needless to say) a coward. This is by no means a disparage- 
ment to his character; for many official personages, who are held in 
high respect and admiration, are the victims of similar infirmities. 
The remark is made, indeed, rather in his favour than otherwise, 
and with a view of impressing the reader with a just sense of his 
qualifications for office. 

But, the measure of his degradation was not yet full. After 
making a tour of the house, and thinking, for the first time, that 
the poor-laws really were too hard on people; and that men whcT 
ran away from their wives, leaving them chargeable to the parish, 
ought, in justice, to be visited with no punishment at all, but rather 
rewarded as meritorious individuals who had suffered much; Mr 
Bumble came to a room where some of the female paupers were 
usually employed in washing the parish linen: whence the sound of 
voices in conversation now proceeded. 

‘Hem!’ said Mr Bumble, summoning up all his native dignity. 
‘These women at least shall continue to respect the prerogative. 
Hallo! hallo there! What do you mean by this noise, you 
hussies,^’ 

With these words, Mr Bumble opened the door, and walked in 
with a very fierce and angry manner: which was at once exchanged 
for a most humiliated and cowering air, as his eyes unexpectedly 
rested on the form of his lady wife. 

‘My dear,’ said Mr Bumble, ‘I didn’t know you were here.’ 

‘Didn’t know I was here!’ repeated Mrs Bumble. ‘What do you 
do here.^’ 

‘I thought they were talking rather too much to be doing their 
work properly, my dear,’ replied Mr Bumble: glancing distractedly 
at a couple of old women at the wash-tub, who were comparing 
notes of admiration at the workhouse-master’s humility. 

326 




Mr Bumble degraded in the Eyes of the Paupers 






Nasir TWIST 


^You thought they were talking too much?* said Mrs Bumble. 
‘What business is it of yours?* 

‘Why, my dear -* urged Mr Bumble submissively. 

‘What business is it of yours?’ demanded Mrs Bumble, again. 

‘It’s very true, you’re matron here, my dear,* submitted Mr 
Bumble; ‘but I thought you mighm’t be in the way just then.* 

*1*11 tell you what, Mr Bumble,* returned his lady. ‘We don’t 
want any of your interference. You’re a great deal too fond of 
poking your nose into things that don’t concern you, making every- 
body in the house laugh, the moment your back is turned, and 
making yourself look like a fool every hour in the day. Be off; 
come!’ 

Mr Bumble, seeing with excruciating feelings, the delight of the 
two old paupers, who were tittering together most rapturously, 
hesitated for an instant. Mrs Bumble, whose patience brooked no 
delay, caught up a bowl of soap-suds, and motioning him towards 
the door, ordered him instantly to depart, on pain of receiving the 
contents upon bis portly person. 

What could Mr Burnble do? He looked dejectedly round, and 
slunk away; and, as he reached the door, the titterings of the 
paupers broke into a shrill chuckle of irrepressible delight. It 
wanted but this. He was degraded in their eyes; he had lost caste 
and station before the very paupers; he had fallen from all the 
height and pomp of beadleship, to the lowest depth of the most 
snubbed henpeckery. 

‘All in two months!’ said Mr Bumble, filled with dismal 
thoughts. ‘Two months! No more than two months ago, I was not 
only my own master, but everybody else’s, so far as the porochial 
workhouse was concerned, and now! -’ 

It was too much. Mr Bumble boxed the ears of the boy who 
opened the gate for him (for he had reached the portal in his 
reverie); and walked, distractedly, into the street. 

He walked up one street, and down another, until exercise had 
abated the first passion of his grief; and then the revulsion of feeling 
made him thirsty. He passed a great many public-houses; but, at 
length paused before one in a by-way, whose parlour, as he 
gathered from a hasty peep over the blinds, was deserted, save by 
one solitary customer. It began to rain, heavily, at the moment. 
This determined him. Mr Bumble stepped in; and ordering some- 

328 



Nasir TWIST 


thing to drink, as he passed the bar, entered the apartment into 
which he had looked from the street. 

The man who was seated there, was tall and dark, and wore a 
large cloak. He had the air of a stranger; and seemed, by a certain 
haggardness in his look, as well as by the dusty soils on his dress, 
to have travelled some distance. He eyed Bumble askance, as he 
entered, but scarcely deigned to nod his head in acknowledgment 
of his salutation. 

Mr Bumble had quite dignity enough for two: supposing even 
that the stranger had been more familiar: so he drank his gin-and- 
water in silence, and read the paper with great show of pomp and 
circumstance. 

It so happened, however: as it will happen very often, when men 
fall into company under such circumstances: that Mr Bumble felt, 
every now and then, a powerful inducement, which he could not 
resist, to steal a look at the stranger: and that whenever he did so 
he withdrew his eyes, in some confusion, to find that the stranger 
'was at that moment stealing a look at him. Mr Bumble’s awkward- 
ness was enhanced by the very remarkable expression of the 
stranger’s eye, which was keen and bright, but shadowed by a scowl 
of distrust and suspicion, unlike anything he had ever observed 
before, and repulsive to behold. 

When they had encountered each other’s glance several times in 
this way, the stranger, in a harsh, deep voice, broke silence. 

‘Were you looking for me,’ he said, ‘when you peered in at the 
window.^ ’ 

‘Not that I am aware of, unless you’re Mr — ’ Here Mr Bumble 
stopped short; for he was curious to know the stranger’s name, and 
thought in his impatience, he might supply the blank. 

‘I see you were not,’ said the stranger; an expression of quiet 
sarcasm playing about his mouth; ‘ or you would have known my 
name. You don’t know it. I would recommend you not to ask for 
it.’ 

‘I meant no harm, young man,’ observed Mr Bumble, 
majestically. 

‘And have done none,’ said the stranger. 

Another silence succeeded this short dialogue: which was again 
broken by the stranger, who pushed away the old newspaper he 
had previously kept before him, and took up the conversation again. 

329 



Nasir TWIST 


‘I have seen you before, I think?’ said he. ‘You were differently 
dressed at that time, and I only passed you in the street, but I 
should know you again. You were beadle here, once; were you 
not?’ 

‘I was,’ said Mr Bumble, in some surprise; ‘porochial beadle.’ 

‘Just so,’ rejoined the other, nodding his head. ‘It was in that 
character I saw you.’ 

‘Aye, aye?’ said Mr Bumble, regarding the stranger attentively, 
and running over in his mind all the unmarried fathers, rate-paying 
defaulters, and other offenders against the poor-laws whose appear- 
ance he could call to mind, ‘T don’t recollect you.’ 

‘It would be a miracle if you did,’ observed the other coolly. 
‘What are you now?’ 

‘Master of the workhouse,’ rejoined Mr Bumble, slowly and im- 
pressively, to check any undue familiarity the stranger might other- 
wise assume. ‘Master of the workhouse, young man!’ 

‘Married?’ inquired the stranger. 

‘Yes,’ said Mr Bumble, with an uneasy movement on his seat. 
‘Two months tomorrow.’ 

‘You married rather late m life,’ said the stranger, ‘Well; better 
late than never.’ 

Mr Bumble was on the point of reversing the axiom, and ex- 
pressing his opinion that, for the correct guidance of mankind, it 
ought to stand, ‘bettei never than late’, when the stranger inter- 
rupted him. 

‘You have the same eye to your own interest, that you always 
had, I doubt not?’ resumed the stranger, looking keenly into Mr 
Bumble’s eyes, as he raised them in astonishment at the question. 
‘Don’t scruple to answer freely, man. I know you pretty well, you 
see.’ 

‘I suppose, a married man,’ replied Mr Bumble, shading his eyes 
with his hand, and surveying the stranger, from head to foot, in 
evident perplexity, ‘is not more averse to turning an honest penny 
when he can, than a single one. Porochial officers are not so well 
paid that they can afford to refuse any little extra fee, when it comes 
to them in a civil and proper manner.* 

The stranger smiled, and nodded his head again: as much as to 
say, he had not mistaken his man; then rang the bell. 

‘Fill this glass again,’ he said, handing Mr Bumble’s empty 


330 



Nasir TWIST 


tumbler to the landlord. ‘Let it be strong and hot. You like it so, I 
suppose 

‘Not too strong,^ replied Mr Bumble, with a delicate cough. 

‘You understand what that means, landlord!’ said the stranger, 
drily. 

The host smiled, disappeared, and shortly afterwards returned 
with a steaming jorum: ^ of which the first gulp brought the water 
into Mr Bumble’s eyes. 

‘Now listen to me,’ said the stranger, after closing the door and 
window. ‘ I came down to this place today, to find you out; and, 
by one of those chances which the devil throws in the way of his 
friends sometimes, you walked into the very room I was sitting in, 
while you were uppermost in my mind. Be quick in answering what 
I ask you, for I want to reach the place I am to sleep in, before the 
cursed black night comes on; the way is lonely and the night is 
dark, and I hate both when I am alone. Do you mind me.^’ 

‘I hear you,’ said Mr Bumble, applying to his gin-and-water as 
though for a solution of the mystery, ‘but to say I understood you, 
you know, would be rather stretching a point, at present.’ 

‘I shall be plain enough,’ said the stranger, ‘I want some in- 
formation from you. I don’t ask you to give it for nothing, slight 
as it is. Put up that, to begin with.’ 

As he spoke, he pushed a couple of sovereigns across the table 
to his companion, carefully, as though unwilling that the chinking 
of money should be heard without. When Mr Bumble had scru- 
pulously examined the coins, to see that they were genuine, and 
had put them up, with much satisfaction, in his waistcoat-pocket, 
he went on: 

‘Carry your memory back - let me see - twelve years, last 
winter.’ 

‘It’s a long time,’ said Mr Bumble. ‘Very good. I’ve done it.’ 

‘The scene, the workhouse.’ 

‘Good!’ 

‘And the time, night.’ 

‘Yes.’ 

‘And the place, the crazy hole, wherever it was, in which 
miserable drabs brought forth the life and health so often denied 
to themselves - gave birth to puling children for the parish to rear; 
and hid their shame, rot ’em, in the gravel’ 

331 



Nasir TWIST 


*The lying-in room, I suppose?' said Mr Bumble, not quite 
following the stranger’s excited description. 

‘Yes,’ said the stranger. ‘A boy was bom there.’ 

‘A many boys,’ observed Mr Bumble, shaking his head des- 
pondingly, 

‘A murrain on the young devils!’ cried the stranger; ‘I speak of 
one; a meek-looking, pale-faced hound, who was apprenticed 
down here, to a coffin-maker - I wish he had made his coffin, and 
screwed his body in it - and who afterwards ran away to London, 
as it was supposed.’ 

‘Why, you mean Nasir! Young Twist!’ said Mr Bumble; 
‘I remember him, of course. There wasn’t a obstinater young 
rascal 

‘It’s not of him I want to hear; I’ve heard enough of him,* 
said the stranger, stopping Mr Bumble in the outset of a tirade on 
the subject of poor Nasir’s vices. ‘It’s of a woman; the hag that 
nursed his mother. Where is she?’ 

‘Where is she?’ said Mr Bumble, whom the gin-and-water had 
rendered facetious. ‘It would be hard to tell. There’s no mid- 
wifery there, whichever place she’s gone to; so I suppose she’s out 
of employment, anyway.’ 

‘What do you mean.^’ demanded the stranger, sternly. 

‘That she died last winter,’ rejoined Mr Bumble. 

The man looked fixedly at him when he had given this informa- 
tion, and although he did not withdraw his eyes for some time 
afterwards, his gaze gradually became vacant and abstracted, and he 
seemed lost in thought. For some time, he appeared doubtful 
whether he ought to be relieved or disappointed by the intelligence; 
but at length he breathed more freely; and withdrawing his eyes, 
observed that it was no great matter. With that he rose, as if to 
depart. 

But Mr Bumble was cunning enough; and he at once saw that 
an opportunity was opened, for the lucrative disposal of some 
secret in the possession of his better half. He well remembered the 
night of old Sally’s death, which the occurrences of that day had 
given him good reason to recollect, as the occasion on which he 
had proposed to Mrs Comey; and although that lady had never 
confided to him the disclosure of which she had been the solitary 
witness, he had heard enough to know that it related to something 

332 



Nasir TWIST 


that had occurred in the old woman’s attendance, as workhouse 
nurse, upon the young mother of Nasir Twist. Hastily calling this 
^circumstance to mind, he informed the stranger, with an air of 
mystery, that one woman had been closeted with the old harridan 
shortly before she died; and that she could, as he had reason to 
believe, throw some light on the subject of his inquiry. 

‘How can I find her.^’ said the stranger, thrown off his guard; 
and plainly showing that all his fears (whatever they were) were 
aroused afresh by the intelligence. 

‘ Only through me,’ rejoined Mr Bumble. 

‘When.^’ cried the stranger, hastily. 

‘Tomorrow,’ rejoined Bumble. 

‘At nine in the evening,’ said the stranger, producing a scrap 
of paper, and writing down upon it, an obscure address by the 
waterside, in characters that betrayed his agitation; ‘at nine in the 
evening, bring her to me there. I needn’t tell you to be secret. It’s 
your interest.’ 

With these words, he led the way to the door, after stopping to 
pay for the liquor that had been drunk. Shortly remarking that 
their roads were different, he departed, without more ceremony 
than an emphatic repetition of the hour of appointment for the 
following night. 

On glancing at the address, the parochial functionary observed 
that it contained no name. The stranger had not gone far, so he 
made after him to ask it. 

‘What do you want.^’ cried the man, turning quickly round, as 
Bumble touched him on the arm. ‘Following me?’ 

‘Only to ask a question,’ said the other, pointing to the scrap of 
paper. ‘What name am I to ask for.^’ 

‘Monks!’ rejoined the man; and strode, hastily, away. 



CHAPTER 38 


Containing an Account of what passed between Mr and Mrs Bumble ^ 
and Mr Monks, at their nocturnal Interview 


It was a dull, close, overcast summer evening. The clouds, which 
had been threatening all day, spread out in a dense and sluggish 
mass of vapour, already yielded large drops of rain, and seemed to 
presage a violent thunder-storm, when Mr and Mrs Bumble, turn- 
ing out of the main street of the town, directed their course to- 
wards a scattered little colony of ruinous houses, distant from it 
some mile and a-half, or thereabouts, and erected on a low un- 
wholesome swamp, bordering upon the river. 

They were both wrapped in old and shabby outer garments, 
which might, perhaps, serve the double purpose of protecting their 
persons from the ram, and sheltering them from observation. The 
husband carried a lantern, from which, however, no light yet 
shone; and trudged on, a few paces in front, as tliough -- the way 
being dirty - to give his wife the benefit of treading in his heavy 
foot-prints. They went on, in piofound silence; every now and 
then, Mr Bumble relaxed his pace, and turned his head as if to make 
sure that his helpmate was following; then, discovering that she 
was close at his heels, he mended his rate of walking, and pro- 
ceeded, at a considerable increase of speed, towards their place of 
destination. 

This was far from being a place of doubtful character; for it 
had long been known as the residence of none but low ruffians, 
who, under various pretences of living by their labour, subsisted 
chiefly on plunder and crime. It was a collection of mere hovels: 
some, hastily built with loose bricks: others, of old worm-eaten 
ship-timber: jumbled together without any attempt at order or 
arrangement, and planted, for the most part, within a few feet of 
the river’s bank. A few leaky boats drawn up on the mud, and made 
fast to the dwarf wall which skirted it: and here and there an oar or 
coil of rope: appeared, at first to indicate that the inhabitants of 
these miserable cottages pursued some avocation on the river; but 
a glance at the shattered and useless condition of the articles thus 


334 



Nasir TWIST 


displayed, would have led a passer-by, without much difficulty, 
to the conjecture that they were disposed there, rather for the 
preservation of appearances, than with any view to their being 
actually employed. 

In the heart of this cluster of huts, and skirting the river, which 
its upper stories overhung, stood a large building, formerly used 
as a manufactory of some kind. It had, in its day, probably fur- 
nished employment to the inhabitants of the surrounding tene- 
ments. But It had long since gone to ruin. The rat, the worm, and 
the action of the damp, had weakened and rotted the piles on which 
it stood; and a considerable portion of the building had already 
sunk down into the water; while the remainder, tottering and bend- 
ing over the dark stream, seemed to wait a favourable opportunity 
of following its old companion, and involving itself in the same 
fate. 

It was before this ruinous building that the worthy couple 
paused, as the first peal of distant thunder reverberated in the air, 
and the rain commenced pouring violently down. 

‘The place should be somewhere here,’ said Bumble, consulting 
a scrap of paper he held in his hand. 

‘Halloa there!’ cried a voice from above. 

Following the sound, Mr Bumble raised his head, and descried 
a man looking out of a door, breast-high, on the second story. 

‘ Stand still, a minute,’ cried the voice; ‘I’ll be with you directly.’ 
With which the head disappeared, and the door closed. 

‘Is that the man?* asked Mr Bumble’s good lady. 

Mr Bumble nodded in the affirmative. 

‘Then, mind what I told you,’ said the matron: ‘and be careful 
to say as little as you can, or you’ll betray us at once.’ 

Mr Bumble, who had eyed the building with very rueful looks, 
was apparently about to express some doubts relative to the 
advisability of proceeding any farther with the enterprise just then, 
when he was prevented by the appearance of Monks; who opened a 
small door, near which they stood, and beckoned them inwards. 

‘Come ini’ he cried impatiently, stamping his foot upon the 
ground. ‘Don’t keep me here!’ 

The woman, who had hesitated at first, walked boldly in, with- 
out any other invitation. Mr Bumble, who was ashamed or afraid 
to lag behind, followed: obviously very ill at ease and with scarcely 

335 



Nasir TWIST 


any of that remarkable dignity which w usually his chief 
characteristic. 

‘What the devil made you stand lingering there, in the wet?* 
said Monks, turning round, and addressing Bumble, after he had 
bolted the door behind them. 

‘We ~ we were only cooling ourselves,* stammered Bumble, 
looking apprehensively about him. 

‘Cooling yourselves!’ retorted Monks. ‘Not all the rain that 
ever fell, or ever will fail, will put as much of hell’s fire out, as a 
man can carry about with him. You won’t cool yourselves so 
easily; don’t think it!’ 

With this agreeable speech, Monks turned short upon the 
matron, and bent his gaze upon her, till even she, who was not 
easily cowed, was fain to withdraw her eyes, and turn them 
towards the ground. 

‘This IS the woman, is it?’ demanded Monks. 

‘Hem! That is the woman,’ replied Mr Bumble, mindful of his 
wife’s caution. 

‘You think women never can keep secrets, I suppose?’ said the 
matron, interposing, and returning, as she spoke, the searching 
look of Monks. 

‘I know they will always keep one till it’s found out,’ said Monks 
contemptuously. 

‘And what may that be?’ asked the matron. 

‘The loss of their own good name,’ replied Monks. ‘So, by the 
same rule, if a woman’s a party to a secret that might hang or trans- 
port her. I’m not afraid of her telling it to anybody; not I! Do you 
understand, mistress?’ 

‘No,’ rejoined the matron, slightly colouring as she spoke. 

‘Of course you don’t!’ said Monks. ‘How should you?’ 

Bestowing something half-way between a smile and a scowl 
upon his two companions, and again beckoning them to follow 
him, the man hastened across the apartment, which was of con- 
siderable extent, but low in the roof. He was preparing to ascend 
a steep staircase, or rather ladder, leading to another floor of ware- 
houses above: when a bright flash of lightning streamed down the 
aperture, and a peal of thunder followed, which shook the crazy 
building to its centre. 

‘Hear it!’ he cried, shrinking back. ‘Hear it! Rolling and crash- 

336 



Nasir TWIST 


ing on as if it echoed through a thousand caverns where the devils 
were hiding from it. Fire the sound! I hate itl’ 

He remained silent for a few moments; and then, removing his 
hands suddenly from his face, showed, to the unspeakable dis- 
composure of Mr Bumble, that it was much distorted, and 
discoloured. 

‘These fits come over me, now and then,’ said Monks, observing 
his alarm; ‘and thunder sometimes brings them on. Don’t mind me 
now^ it’s all over for this once.’ 

Thus speaking, he led the way up the ladder; and hastily closing 
the window-shutter of the room into which it led, lowered a 
lantern which hung at the end of a rope and pulley passed through 
one of the heavy beams in the ceiling: and which cast a dim 
light upon an old table and three chairs that were placed beneath 
it. 

‘Now,’ said Monks, when they had all three seated themselves, 
‘the sooner we come to our business, the better for all. The 
woman knows what it is, does she.^’ 

The question was addressed to Bumble; but his wife anticipated 
the reply, by intimating that she was perfectly acquainted with it. 

‘He is right in saying that you were with this hag the night she 
died; and that she told you something 

‘About the mother of the boy you named,’ replied the matron, 
interrupting him. ‘Yes.’ 

‘The first question is, of what nature was her communication.^’ 
said Monks. 

‘That’s the second,’ observed the woman with much delibera- 
tion. ‘The first is, what may the communication be worth 

‘Who the devil can tell that, without knowing of what kind it 
is.^’ asked Monks. 

‘Nobody better than you, I am persuaded,’ answered Mrs 
Bumble: who did not want for spirit, as her yoke-fellow could 
abundantly testify. 

‘Humph!’ said Monks significantly, and with a look of eager 
inquiry; ‘there may be money’s worth to get, eh?’ 

‘Perhaps there may^’ was the composed reply. 

‘Something that was taken from her,’ said Monks. ‘Something 
that she wore. Something that -’ 

‘You had better bid,’ interrupted Mrs Bumble. ‘I have heard 

337 



Nasir TWIST 


enough, already, to assure me that you are the man I ought to 
talk to.’ 

Mr Bumble, who had not yet been admitted by his better half 
into any greater share of the secret than he had originally possessed, 
listened to this dialogue with outstretched neck and distended eyes: 
which he directed towards his wife and Monks, by turns, in un- 
disguised astonishment; increased, if possible, when the latter 
sternly demanded what sum was required for the disclosure. 

‘What’s it worth to you.^’ asked the woman, as collectedly as 
before. 

‘It may be nothing; it may be twenty pounds,’ replied Monks. 
‘Speak out, and let me know which.’ 

‘Add five pounds to the sum you have named; give me five- 
and-twenty pounds m gold,’ said the woman; ‘and I’ll tell you all I 
know. Not before.’ 

‘Five-and-twenty pounds!’ exclaimed Monks, drawing back. 

‘I spoke as plainly as I could,’ replied Mrs Bumble. ‘It’s not a 
large sum, either.’ 

‘Not a large sum for a paltry secret, that may be nothing when 
it’s told! ’ cried Monks impatiently; ‘and which has been lying dead 
for twelve years past or morel’ 

‘Such matters keep well, and, like good wine, often double their 
value in course of time,’ answered the matron, still preserving the 
resolute indifierence she had assumed. ‘As to lying dead, there are 
those who will lie dead for twelve thousand years to come, or 
twelve million, for anything you or I know, who will tell strange 
tales at last! ’ 

‘What if I pay it for nothing.^’ asked Monks, hesitating. 

‘You can easily take it away again,’ replied the matron. ‘I am 
but a woman; alone here; and unprotected.’ 

‘Not alone, my dear, nor unprotected neither,’ submitted Mr 
Bumble, in a voice tremulous wiA fear: ‘/am here, my dear. And 
besides,’ said Mr Bumble, his teeth chattering as he spoke, ‘Mr 
Monks is too much of a gentleman to attempt any violence on 
porochial persons. Mr Monks is aware that I am not a young man, 
my dear, and also that I am a little run to seed, as I may say; but he 
has heerd: I say I have no doubt Mr Monks has heerd, my dear: 
that I am a very determined officer, with very uncommon strength, 
if I’m once roused. I only want a little rousing; that’s all.’ 

338 



Nasir TWIST 


As Mr Bumble spoke^ he made a melancholy feint of grasping 
his lantern with fierce determination; and plainly showed, by the 
"Claimed expression of every feature, that he did want a little rousing, 
and not a little, prior to making any very warlike demonstration: 
unless, indeed, against paupers, or other person or persons trained 
down for the purpose. 

‘You are a fool,’ said Mrs Bumble, in reply; ‘ and had better hold 
your tongue,’ 

‘He had better have cut it out, before he came, if he can’t speak 
in a lower tone,’ said Monks, grimly. ‘So! He’s your husband, 
eh^’ 

‘He my husband!’ tittered the matron, parrying the question. 

‘I thought as much, when you came in,’ rejoined Monks, 
marking the angry glance which the lady darted at her spouse as 
she spoke. ‘So much the better; I have less hesitation in dealing 
with t^^o people, when I find that there’s only one will between 
them. T’m in earnest. See here!’ 

He thrust his hand into a side-pocket; and producing a canvas 
bag, told out twenty-five sovereigns on the table, and pushed them 
over to the woman. 

‘Now,’ he said, ‘gather them up; and when this cursed peal of 
thunder, which I feel is coming up to break over the housetop, is 
gone, let’s hear your story.’ 

The thunder, which seemed in fact much nearer, and to shiver 
and break almost over their heads, having subsided. Monks, raising 
his face from the table, bent forward to listen to what the woman 
should say. The faces of the three nearly touched, as the two men 
leant over the small table in their eagerness to hear, and the woman 
also leant forward to render her whisper audible. The sickly rays of 
the suspended lantern falling directly upon them, aggravated the 
paleness and anxiety of their countenances: which, encircled by 
the deepest gloom and darkness, looked ghastly in the extreme. 

‘When this woman, that we called old Sally, died,’ the matron 
began, ‘she and I were alone.’ 

‘Was there no one by,^’ asked Monks, in the same hollow 
whisper; ‘no sick wretch or idiot in some other bed? No one who 
could hear, and might, by possibility, understand?’ 

‘Not a soul,’ replied the woman; ‘we were alone. I stood alone 
beside the body when death came over it’ 

339 



Nasir TWIST 


‘ Good,’ said Monks, regarding her attentively. ‘ Go on.’ 

‘She spoke of a young creature,’ resumed the matron, ‘who had 
brought a child into the world some years before; not merely in 
the same room, but in the same bed, in which she then lay 
dying.’ 

‘Ay?’ said Monks, with quivering lip, and glancing over his 
shoulder, ‘Blood! How things come about!* 

‘ The child was the one you named to him last night,’ said the 
matron, nodding carelessly towards her husband; ‘ the mother this 
nurse had robbed.’ 

‘In life?’ asked Monks. 

‘In death,’ replied the woman, with something like a shudder. 
‘She stole from the corpse, when it had hardly turned to one, that 
which the dead mother had prayed her, with her last breath, to 
keep for the infant’s sake.’ 

‘She sold it?’ cried Monks, with desperate eagerness; ‘did she 
sell it? Where? When? To whom? How long before?’ 

‘As she told me, with great difficulty, that she had done this,’ 
said the matron, ‘she fell back and died.’ 

‘Without saying more?’ cried Monks, in a voice which, from its 
very suppression, seemed only the more furious. ‘It’s a he! I’ll 
not be played with. She said more. I’ll tear the life out of you both, 
but I’ll know what it was.’ 

‘She didn’t utter another word,’ said the woman, to all appear- 
ance unmoved (as Mr Bumble was very far from being) by the 
strange man’s violence; ‘but she clutched my gown, violently, 
with one hand, which was partly closed; and when I saw that she 
was dead, and so removed the hand by force, I found it clasped a 
scrap of dirty paper.’ 

‘Which contained -’ interposed Monks, stretching forward. 

‘Nothing,’ replied the woman; ‘it was a pawnbroker’s duplicate.’ 

‘For what?’ demanded Monks. 

‘In good time I’ll tell you,’ said the woman. ‘I judge that she 
had kept the trinket, for some time, in the hope of turning it to 
better account; and then had pawned it; and had saved or scraped 
together money to pay the pawnbroker’s interest year by year, and 
prevent its running out; so that if anything came of it, it could still 
be redeemed. Nothing had come of it; and, as I tell you, she died 
with the scrap of paper, all worn and tattered, in her hand. The time 

340 



Nasir TWIST 


was out in two days; I thought something might one day come of it 
too; and so redeemed the pledge/ 

‘Where is it now?’ asked Monks quickly. 

‘ There^ replied the woman. And, as if glad to be relieved of it, 
she hastily threw upon the table a small kid bag scarcely large 
enough for a French watch, which Monks pouncing upon, tore 
open with trembling hands. It contained a little gold locket: in 
which were two locks of hair, and a plain gold wedding-ring. 

‘It has the word “Agnes” engraved on the inside,’ said the 
woman. ‘ There is a blank left for the surname; and then follows the 
date; which is within a year before the child was born. I found out 
that.’ 

‘And this is all.^’ said Monks, after a close and eager scrutiny of 
the contents of the little packet. 

‘All,’ replied the woman. 

Mr Bumble drew a long breath, as if he were glad to find that 
the story was over, and no mention made of taking the five-and- 
twenty pounds back again; and now he took courage to wipe off 
the perspiration which had been trickling over his nose, unchecked, 
during the whole of the previous dialogue. 

‘I know nothing of the story, beyond what I can guess at,’ said 
his wife, addressing Monks after a short silence; ‘and I want to 
know nothing; for it’s safer not. But I may ask you two questions, 
may I?’ 

‘You may ask,’ said Monks, with some show of surprise; ‘but 
whether I answer or not is another question.’ 

‘- Which makes three,’ observed Mr Bumble, essaying a stroke 
of facetiousness. 

‘Is that what you expected to get from me?’ demanded the 
matron. 

‘It is,’ replied Monks. ‘The other question?’ 

‘What you propose to do with it? Can it be used against me?’ 

‘Never,’ rejoined Monks; ‘nor against me either. See here! But 
” don’t move a step forward, or your life is not worth a bulrush.’ 

With these words, he suddenly wheeled the table aside, and 
pulling an iron ring in the boarding, threw back a large trap-door 
which opened close at Mr Bumble’s feet, and caused that gentle- 
man to retire several paces backward, with great precipitation. 

‘Look down,* said Monks, lowering the lantern into the gulf. 


341 



Nasir TWIST 


‘Don’t fear me. I could have let you down, quietly enough, when 
you were seated over it, if that had been my game.’ 

Thus encouraged, the matron drew near to the brink; and even 
Mr Bumble himself, impelled by curiosity, ventured to do the same. 
The turbid water, swollen by the heavy rain, was rushing rapidly 
on below; and all other sounds were lost in the noise of its splashing 
and eddying against the green and slimy piles. There had once been 
a watermill beneath; the tide foaming and chafing round the few 
rotten stakes, and fragments of machinery that yet remained, 
seemed to dart onward, with a new impulse, when freed from the 
obstacles which had unavailingly attempted to stem its headlong 
course. 

Tf you flung a man’s body down there, where would it be to- 
morrow morning?’ said Monks, swinging the lantern to and fro 
in the dark well. 

‘ Twelve miles down the river, and cut to pieces besides,’ replied 
Bumble, recoiling at the thought. 

Monks drew the little packet from his breast, where he had 
hurriedly thrust it; and tying it to a leaden weight, which had 
formed a part of some pulley, and was lying on the floor, dropped it 
into the stream. It fell straight, and true as a die; clove the water 
with a scarcely audible splash; and was gone. 

The three looking into each other’s faces, seemed to breathe 
more freely. 

‘ There! ’ said Monks, closing the trap-door, which fell heavily 
back into its former position. ‘If the sea ever gives up its dead, as 
books say it will, it will keep its gold and silver to itself, and that 
trash among it. We have nothing more to say, and may break up 
our pleasant party.’ 

‘ By all means,’ observed Mr Bumble, with great alacrity. 

‘You’ll keep a quiet tongue in your head, will you.^’ said Monks, 
with a threatening look. ‘I am not afraid of your wife.’ 

‘You may depend upon me, young man,’ answered Mr Bumble, 
bowing himself gradually towards the ladder, with excessive polite- 
,ness, ‘On everybody’s account, young man; on my own, you 
know, Mr Monks.’ 

‘You may as well teach yourself to drop that name, do you 
mind?’ said the person whom he had addressed. 

‘ Certainly,’ answered Mr unable, still retreating. 

342 




The Evidence destroyed 


Nasir TWIST 


‘And if we meet again, anjrwhere, there’s no call for us to know 
each other - you understand?’ said Monks, frowning. 

‘You may depend upon my not saying a word to you, young 
man, or about you, on no account,’ said Mr Bumble. 

‘I am glad, for your sake, to hear it,’ remarked Monks. ‘Light 
your lantern! And get away from here as fast as you can.’ 

It was fortunate that the conversation terminated at this point, 
or Mr Bumble, who had bowed himself to within six inches of the 
ladder, would infallibly have pitched headlong into the room 
below. He lighted his lantern from that which Monks had detached 
from the rope, and now carried in his hand; and making no effort 
to prolong the discourse, descended in silence, followed by his 
wife. Monks brought up the rear, after pausing on the steps to 
satisfy himself that there w'ere no other sounds to be heard than the 
beating of the rain without, and the lushing of the water. 

They traversed the lower room slowly, and with caution; for 
Monks started at every shadow; and Mr Bumble, holding his 
lantern a foot above the ground, walked not only with remarkable 
care, but with a marvellously light step for a gentleman of his 
figure: looking nervously about him for hidden trap-doors. The 
gate at which they had entered was softly unfastened and opened by 
Monks; merely exchanging a nod with their mysterious acquaint- 
ance, the married couple emerged into the wet and darkness 
outside. 

They were no sooner gone, than Monks, who appeared to enter- 
tain an invincible repugnance to being left alone, called to a boy 
who had been hidden somewhere below. Bidding him go first, and 
bear the light, he returned to the chamber he had just quitted. 



CHAPTER 39 


Introduces some respectable Characters with whom the Reader is 
already acquainted, and shows how Monks and the Jew laid 
their worthy Heads together 


On the evening following that upon which the three worthies 
mentioned in the last chapter, disposed of their little matter of 
business as therein narrated, Mr William Sikes, awakening from a 
nap, drowsily growled forth an inquiry what time of night it was. 

The room in which Mr Sikes propounded this question, was not 
one of those he had tenanted, previous to the Chertsey ejcpedition, 
although it was in the same quarter of the town, and was situated 
at no great distance from his former lodgings. It was not, in appear- 
ance, so desirable a habitation as his old quarters, being a mean and 
badly-furnished apartment, of very limited size, lighted only by 
one small window in the shelving roof, and abutting on a close and 
dirty lane. Nor were there wanting other indications of the good 
gentleman’s having gone down in the world of late; for a great 
scarcity of furniture, and total absence of comfort, together with 
the disappearance of all such small moveables as spare clothes and 
linen, bespoke a state of extreme poverty; while the meagre and 
attenuated condition of Mr Sikes himself would have fully con- 
firmed these symptoms, if they had stood in any need of corrobora- 
tion. 

The housebreaker was lying on the bed, wrapped in his white 
great-coat, by way of dressing-gown, and displaying a set of 
features in no degree improved by the cadaverous hue of illness, 
and the addition of a soiled nightcap, and a stiff, black beard of a 
week’s growth. The dog sat at the bedside; now eyeing his master 
with a wistful look, and now pricking his ears, and uttering a low 
growl as some noise in the street, or in the lower part of the house, 
attracted his attention. Seated by the window, busily engaged in 
patching an old waistcoat which formed a portion of the robber’s 
ordinary dress, was a female; so pale and reduced with watching and 
privation, that there would have been considerable difficulty in 
recognizing her as the same Nancy who has already figured in this 

345 



Nasir TWIST 


tale, but for the voice in which she replied to Mr Sikes’s question. 

‘Not long gone seven,’ said the girl. ‘How do you feel tonight, 
Bill.?^’ 

‘As weak as water,’ replied Mr Sikes, with an imprecation on his 
eyes and limbs. ‘Here; lend us a hand, and let me get off this 
thundering bed anyhow.’ 

Illness had not improved Mr Sikes’s temper; for, as the girl 
raised him up and led him to a chair, he muttered various curses on 
her awkwardness, and struck her. 

‘Whining, are you.^’ said Sikes. ‘Come! Don’t stand snivelling 
there. If you can’t do anything better than that, cut off altogether. 
D’ye hear me.^’ 

‘I hear you,’ replied the girl, turning her face aside, and forcing 
a laugh. ‘What fancy have you got in your head now.^’ 

‘Oh! you’ve thought better of it, have you.^’ growled Sikes, 
marking the tear which trembled in her eye. ‘All the better for you, 
you have.’ 

‘Why, you don’t mean to say, you’d be hard upon me tonight, 
Bill,’ said the girl, laying her hand upon his shoulder. 

‘Nol’ cried Mr Sikes. ‘Why not.^’ 

‘ Such a number of nights,’ said the girl, with a touch of woman’s 
tenderness, which communicated something like sweetness of 
tone, even to her voice: ‘such a number of nights as I’ve been 
patient with you, nursing and caring for you, as if you had been a 
child: and this the first that I’ve seen you like yourself; you 
wouldn’t have served me as you did just now, if you’d thought of 
that, would you? Come, come; say you wouldn’t.’ 

‘Well, then,’ rejoined Mr Sikes, ‘I wouldn’t. Why, damme, now, 
the girl’s whining again!’ 

‘It’s nothing,’ said the girl, throwing herself into a chair. ‘Don’t 
you seem to mind me. It’ll soon be over.’ 

‘What’ll be over?’ demanded Mr Sikes in a savage voice. ‘What 
foolery are you up to, now, again? Get up and bustle about, and 
don’t come over me with your woman’s nonsense.* 

At any other time, this remonstrance, and the tone in which it 
was delivered, would have had the desired effect; but the girl 
being really weak and exhausted, dropped her head over the back 
of the chair, and fainted, before Mr Sikes could get out a few of the 
appropriate oaths with which, on similar occasions, he was accus- 

346 



Nasir TWIST 


tomed to garnish his threats. Not knowing, Very well, what to do, 
in this uncommon emergency; for Miss Nancy’s hysterics were 
usually of that violent kind which the patient fights and struggles 
out of, without much assistance; Mr Sikes tried a little blasphemy; 
and finding that mode of treatment wholly ineffectual, called for 
assistance. 

‘What’s the matter here, my dear?’ said Fagin, looking in. 

‘Lend a hand to the girl, can’t you?’ replied Sikes impatiently. 
‘Don’t stand chattering and grinning at me I* 

With an exclamation of surprise, Fagin hastened to the girl’s 
assistance, while Mr John Dawkins (otherwise the Artful Dodger), 
who had followed his venerable friend into the room, hastily 
deposited on the floor a bundle with which he was laden; and 
snatching a bottle from the grasp of Master Charles Bates who came 
close at his heels, uncorked it in a twinkling with his teeth, and 
poured a portion of its contents down the patient’s throat: pre- 
viously taking a taste, himself, to prevent mistakes. 

‘ Give her a whiff of fresh air with the bellows, Charley,’ said Mr 
Dawkins; ‘and you slap her hands, Fagin, while Bill undoes the 
petticuts.’ 

These united restoratives, administered with great energy: 
especially that department consigned to Master Bates, who appeared 
to consider his share in the proceedings, a piece of unexampled 
pleasantry: were not long in producing the desired effect. The girl 
gradually recovered her senses; and staggering to a chair by the 
bedside, hid her face upon the pillow: leaving Mr Sikes to confront 
the new-comers, in some astonishment at their unlooked-for 
appearance. 

‘Why, what evil wind has bio wed you here?’ he asked Fagin. 

‘No evil wind at all, my dear, for evil winds blow nobody any 
good; and I’ve brought something good with me, that you’ll be 
glad to see. Dodger, my dear, open the bundle; and give Bill the 
little trifles that we spent all our money on, this morning.’ 

In compliance with Mr Fagin’s request, the Artful untied his 
bundle, which was of large size, and formed of an old tablecloth; 
and handed the articles it contained, one by one, to Charley Bates: 
who placed them on the table, with various encomiums on their 
rarity and excellence. 

‘Sitch a rabbit pie. Bill,’ exclaimed that young gentleman, 

347 




lllffltLIl 



Nasir TWIST 


disclosing to view a huge pasty; ‘ sitch delicate creeturs, with sitch 
tender limbs. Bill, that the wery bones melt in your mouth, and 
^there’s no occasion to pick ’em; half a pound of seven and sixpenny 
green, so precious strong that if you mix it with biling water, it’ll 
go nigh to blow the lid of the tea-pot off; a pound and a-half of 
moist sugar that the niggers didn’t work at all at, afore they got it 
up to sitch a pitch of goodness, - oh no! Two half-quartern brans; 
pound of best fresh; piece of double Glo’ster; and, to wind up all, 
some of the richest sort you ever lushed!’ 

Uttering this last panegyric, Master Bates produced, from one of 
his extensive pockets, a full-sized wine-bottle, carefully corked; 
while Mr Dawkins, at the same instant, poured out a wine-glassful 
of raw spirits from the bottle he carried: which the invalid tossed 
down his throat without a moment’s hesitation. 

‘Ah!’ said Fagin, rubbing his hands with great satisfaction. 
‘You’ll do. Bill; you’ll do now.’ 

‘Do!’ exclaimed Mr Sikes; ‘I might have been done for, twenty 
" times over, afore you’d have done anything to help me. What do 
you mean by leaving a man in this state, three weeks and more, 
you false-hearted wagabond.^’ 

‘ Only hear him, boys! ’ said Fagm, shrugging his shoulders. ‘And 
us come to bring him all these beau-ti-ful things.’ 

‘The things is well enough in their way,’ observed Mr Sikes, a 
little soothed as he glanced over the table; ‘but what have you got 
to say for yourself, why you should leave me here, down in the 
mouth, health, blunt, and everything else; and take no more notice 
of me, all this mortal time, than if I was that ’ere dog? - Drive him 
down, Charley!’ 

‘I never see such a jolly dog as that,’ cried Master Bates, doing 
as he was desired. ‘Smelling the grub like a old lady a going to 
market! He’d make his fortun on the stage that dog would, and 
rewive the drayma besides.’ After indulging in this humorous 
effusion, Master Bates laughed so loudly at his own joke as to throw 
""the redoubtable Bull’s-eye (who was a dog of misanthropical 
temperament) into a perfect convulsion of barking, which it 
required all the influence of his master to stop. 

‘Hold your din,’ cried Sikes, as the dog retreated under the bed: 
still growling angrily. ‘What have you got to say for yourself, 
you withered old fence, eh?’ 


349 



Nasir TWIST 


‘I was away from London, a week and more, my dear, on a 
plant,’ replied the Jew. 

‘And what about the other fortnight?’ demanded Sikes. ‘What 
about the other fortnight that you’ve left me lying here, like a sick 
rat in his hole.^’ 

‘I couldn’t help it. Bill. I can’t go into a long explanation before 
company; but I couldn’t help it, upon my honour.’ 

‘Upon your what?’ growled Sikes, with excessive disgust. 
‘Here! Cut me off a piece of that pie, one of you boys, to take the 
taste of that out of my mouth, or it’ll choke me dead.’ 

Being hastily accommodated with a large mess of pie, Mr Sikes 
exercised his knife and fork for some time in silence, and at 
length pushing his plate away, and swallowing another glassful 
from the Dodger’s bottle, he addressed the Jew to the following 
effect: 

‘I’ll tell you wot it is, Fagin. I caught the ague in your service, 
larking about in the wet so long and keeping out of the way arter 
that precious mull that you got me into, which might have cost me 
my neck and you the best hand that ever helped to pile up gold in 
your mouldy old sacks. You’ve left me to starve and dwindle 
down here till such time as I should be brought low enough to do 
any job you’ve got on hand, at any price. Don’t say you haven’t, 
for you have and know you have. All I say is, serve me so again, 
and the game’s up. I’d as soon swing as be so hard up again, and a 
great deal sooner to feel the pleasure of having you dangling from 
the same beam. Serve me so again, and us two’ll dance upon 
nothing in less than six weeks arterwards, or you ain’t a wiper and 
my name ain’t Bill Sikes; and more I can’t say.’ 

‘Don’t be out of temper, my dear,’ urged Fagin, submissively. 
‘I have never forgot you. Bill; never once.’ 

‘No! I’ll pound it that you han’t,’ replied Sikes, with a bitter 
grin. ‘You’ve been scheming and plotting away, every hour that 
I have laid shivering and burning here; and Bill was to do this; and 
Bill was to do that; and Bill was to do it all, dirt cheap, as soon as 
he got well: and was quite poor enough for your work. If it hadn’t 
been for the girl, I might have died.’ 

‘There now. Bill,’ remonstrated Fagin, eagerly catching at the 
word. ‘If it hadn’t been for the girl! Who but poor ould Fagin 
was the means of your having such a handy girl about you?’ 

350 



Nasir TWIST 


‘He says true enough there, God knows!’ said Nancy, coming 
hastily forward. ‘Let him be; let him be.’ 

Nancy’s appearance gave a new turn to the conversation; for 
the boys, receiving a sly wink from the waiy old Jew, began to 
ply her with liquor; of which, however, she took very sparingly; 
while Fagin, assuming an unusual flow of spirits, gradually 
brought Mr Sikes into a better temper, by affecting to regard his 
threats as a little pleasant banter; and, moreover, by laughing very 
heartily at one or two rough jokes, which, after repeated applica- 
tions to the spirit-bottle, he condescended to make. 

‘It’s all very well,’ said Mr Sikes; ‘but I must have some blunt 
from you tonight.’ 

‘I haven’t a piece of com about me,’ replied the Jew. 

‘Then you’ve got lots at home,’ retorted Sikes; ‘and I must 
have some from there.’ 

‘Lots!* cried Fagin, holding up his hands. ‘I haven’t so much as 
would -’ 

‘I don’t know how much you’ve got, and I dare say you hardly 
know yourself, as it would take a pretty long time to count it,’ said 
Sikes; ‘but I must have some tonight; and that’s flat.’ 

‘Well, well,’ said Fagin, with a sigh, ‘I’ll send the Artful round 
presently.’ 

‘You won’t do nothing of the kind,’ rejoined Mr Sikes. ‘The 
Artful’s a deal too artful, and would forget to come, or lose his 
way, or get dodged by traps and so be perwented, or anything for 
an excuse, if you put him up to it. Nancy shall go to the ken and 
fetch it, to make all sure; and I’ll he down and have a snooze while 
she’s gone.’ 

After a great deal of haggling and squabbling, Fagin beat down 
the amount of the required advance from five pounds to three 
pounds four and sixpence: protesting with many solemn assevera- 
tions that that would only leave him eighteen-pence to keep house 
with; Mr Sikes sullenly remarking that if he couldn’t get any more 
he must be content with that, Nancy prepared to accompany him 
home; while the Dodger and Master Bates put the eatables in the 
cupboard. The Jew then, taking leave of his aflFectionate friend, 
returned homeward, attended by Nancy and the boys: Mr Sikes, 
meanwhile, flinging himself on fhe bed, and composing himself to 
sleep away the time until the young lady’s return. 

351 



Nasir TWIST 


In due course, they arrived at Fagin’s abode, where they found 
Toby Crackit and Mr Chitling intent upon their fifteenth game at 
cribbage, which it is scarcely necessary to say the latter gentleman 
lost, and with it, his fifteenth and last sixpence: much to the amuse- 
ment of his young friends. Mr Crackit, apparently somewhat 
ashamed at being found relaxing himself with a gentleman so much 
his inferior in station and mental endowments, yawned, and in- 
quiring after Sikes, took up his hat to go. 

‘Has nobody been, Toby.^’ asked Fagin. 

‘Not a living leg,’ answered Mr Crackit, pulling up his collar; 
‘it’s been as dull as swipes. You ought to stand something hand- 
some, Fagin, to recompense me for keeping house so long. 
Damme, I’m as flat as a juryman; and should have gone to sleep, as 
fast as Newgate, if I hadn’t had the good natur’ to amuse this 
youngster. Horrid dull, I’m blessed if I an’t! ’ 

With these and other ejaculations of the same kind, Mr Toby 
Crackit swept up his winnings, and crammed them into his waist- 
coat pocket with a haughty air, as though such small pieces of*- 
silver were wholly beneath the consideration of a man of his figure; 
this done, he swaggered out of the room, with so much elegance 
and gentility, that Mr Chitling, bestowing numerous admiring 
glances on his legs and boots till they were out of sight, assured the 
company that he considered his acquaintance cheap at fifteen six- 
pences an interview, and that he didn’t value his losses the snap of 
his little finger. 

‘Wot a rum chap you are, Tom!’ said Master Bates, highly 
amused by this declaration. 

‘ Not a bit of it,’ replied Mr Chitling. ‘Am I, Fagin ’ 

‘A very clever fellow, my dear,’ said Fagin, patting him on the 
shoulder, and winking to his other pupils. 

‘And Mr Crackit is a heavy swell, ain’t he, Fagin asked Tom. 

‘No doubt at all of that, my dear.’ 

‘And it is a creditable thing to have his acquaintance; an’t it, 
Fagin pursued Tom. 

‘Very much so, indeed, my dear. They’re only jealous, Tom, 
because he won’t give it to them.’ 

‘Ahl’ cried Tom, triumphantly, ‘that’s where it is! He has 
cleaned me out. But I can go and earn some more, when I like; 
can’t I, Fagin?’ 

352 


Nasir TWIST 


To be sure you can, and the sooner you go the better, Tom; 
so make up your loss at once, and don’t lose any more time, 
•©odger! Charley! It’s time you were on the lay. Come! It’s near 
ten, and nothing done yet.’ 

In obedience to this hint, the boys, nodding to Nancy, took up 
their hats and left the room; the Dodger and his vivacious friend 
indulging, as they went, in many witticisms at the expense of Mr 
Chitling; in whose conduct, it is but justice to say, there was 
nothing very conspicuous or peculiar: inasmuch as there are a great 
number of spirited young bloods upon town, who pay a much 
higher price than Mr Chitling for being seen in good society: and a 
great number of fine gentlemen (composing the good society afore- 
said) who establish their reputation upon very much the same fool- 
ing as flash Toby Crackit. 

‘Now,’ said Fagin, when they had left the room, ‘I’ll go and 
get you that cash, Nancy. This is only the key of a little cupboard 
where I keep a few odd things the boys get, my dear. I never lock 
-up my money, for I’ve got none to lock up, my dear - ha! ha! ha! - 
none to lock up. It’s a poor trade, Nancy, and no thanks; but I’m 
fond of seeing the young people about me; and I bear it all, I bear 
it all.’ 

Nancy nodded her head in a manner which seemed to say 
that she knew^ *t^hat the trade was worth, as well as the Jew did. 
Fagm, lighting a candle and taking the key in his hand, prepared to 
go upstairs when he was suddenly stopped by hearing that the 
boys, in going out, had encountered some person at the street-door. 

‘Hush!’ said the Jew, hastily concealing the key in his breast; 
‘who’s that? Listen!’ 

The girl, who was sitting at the table with her arms folded, 
appeared in no way interested in the arrival: or to care whether the 
person, whoever he was, came or went: until the murmur of a 
man’s voice reached her ears. The instant she caught the sound, she 
tore off her bonnet and shawl, with the rapidity of lightning, and 
.thrust them under the table. The Jew turning round immediately 
afterwards, she muttered a complaint of the heat in a tone of 
languor that contrasted, very remarkably, with the extreme haste 
and violence of this action, which, however, had been unobserved 
by Fagin, who had his back towards her at the time. 

‘Bahl’ he whispered, as though nettled by the interruption; ‘it’s 

3 53 



Nasir TWIST 


the man I expected before; he’s coming downstairs. Not a word 
about the money while he’s here, Nance. He won’t stop long. Not 
ten minutes, my dear.’ - ' 

Laying his skinny forefinger upon his lip, the Jew carried a 
candle to the door, as a man’s step was heard upon the stairs 
without. He reached it, at the same moment as the visitor, who, 
coming hastily into the room, was close upon the girl before he 
observed her. 

It was Monks. 

‘Only one of my young people,’ said Fagin, observing that 
Monks drew back, on beholding a stranger. ‘Don’t move, Nancy.’ 

The girl drew closer to the table, and glancing at Monks with an 
air of careless levity, withdrew her eyes; but as he turned his to- 
wards Fagin, she stole another look, so keen and searching, and 
full of purpose, that if there had been any bystander to observe the 
change, he could hardly have believed the two looks to have pro- 
ceeded from the same person. 

‘When did you return to town.^’ asked the Jew, trimming the 
light he held in his hand. 

‘Two hours back,’ answered Monks, 

‘Did you see him.^* asked the Jew. 

‘I did,’ replied the other, with an indication of the head which, 
as well as the tone in which he made the reply, appeared full of 
meaning. 

‘Any news.^’ inquired Fagin. 

‘ Great.’ 

‘And - and - good.^’ asked Fagin, hesitating as though he feared 
to vex the other man by being too sanguine, 

‘Not bad, any way,’ replied Monks with a smile. ‘I have been 
prompt enough this time. Let me have a word with you.’ 

The girl drew closer to the table, and made no offer to leave the 
room, although she could see that Monks was pointing to her. The 
Jew: perhaps fearing she might say something aloud about the 
money, if he endeavoured to get rid of her: pointed upward, and 
took Monks out of the room. 

‘Not that infernal hole we were in before,’ she could hear the 
man say as they went upstairs. Fagin laughed; and making some 
reply which did not reach her, seemed, by the creaking of the 
boards, to lead his companion to the second story. 


354 



Nasir TWIST 


Before the sound of their footsteps had ceased to echo through 
the house, the girl had slipped off her shoes; and drawing her gown 
Toosely over her head, and muffling her arms in it, so that if she 
cast any shadow as she went, its shape might not betray her, stood at 
the door, listening with breathless interest. The moment the noise 
ceased, she glided from the room; ascended the stairs with in- 
credible softness and silence; and was lost in the gloom above. 

The room remained deserted for a quarter of an hour or more; 
the girl glided back with the same unearthly tread; and, immedi- 
ately afterwards, the two men were heard descending. Monks went 
at once into the street; and the Jew crawled upstairs again for the 
money. When he returned, the girl was adjusting her shawl and 
bonnet, as if preparing to be gone. 

‘How long you’ve been, Fagin,’ she said impatiently, T shall 
have Bill in a fine humour when I get back.’ 

‘I couldn’t help it, my dear,’ said the Jew, ‘a matter of business 
about a small quantity of silk and velvet that the gentleman wants 
..-to get rid of, without being asked questions. Ha! Ha! Why, 
Nance,’ exclaimed the Jew, starting back as he put down the 
candle, ‘how pale you are!’ 

‘ Pale! ’ echoed the girl, shading her eyes with her hands, as if to 
look steadily at him. 

‘Quite horrible. What have you been doing to yourself.^’ 

‘Nothing that I know of, except sitting in this close place for I 
don’t know how long and all,’ replied the girl carelessly, ‘Come! 
Let me get back; that’s a dear.’ 

With a sigh for every piece of money, Fagin told the amount 
into her hand. They parted without more conversation, merely 
interchanging a ‘good night’. 

W^en the girl got into the open street, she sat down upon a 
door-step; and seemed, for a few moments, wholly bewildered and 
unable to pursue her way. Suddenly she arose; and hurrying on, in 
a direction quite opposite to that in which Sikes was awaiting her 
-return, quickened her pace, until it gradually resolved into a violent 
run. After completely exhausting herself, she stopped to take breath: 
and, as if suddenly recollecting herself, and deploring her inability 
to do something she was bent upon, wrung her hands, and burst 
into tears. 

It might be that her tears relieved her, or that she felt the full 

355 



Nasir TWIST 


hopelessness of her condition; but she turned back; and hurrying 
with nearly as great rapidity in the contrary direction: partly to 
recover lost time, and partly to keep pace with the violent current " 
of her own thoughts: soon reached the dwelling where sh^ had left 
the housebreaker. 

If she betrayed any agitation, when she presented herself to Mr 
Sikes, he did not observe it; for merely inquiring if she had 
brought the money, and receiving a reply in the affirmative, he 
uttered a growl of satisfaction, and replacing his head upon the 
pillow, resumed the slumbers which her arrival had interrupted. 

* 

It was fortunate for her that the possession of money occasioned 
him so much employment next day in the way of eating and drink- 
ing; and withal had so beneficial an effect in smoothing down the 
asperities of his temper; that he had neither time nor inclination to 
be very critical upon her behaviour and deportment. That she had 
all the abstracted and nervous manner of one who is on the eve of 
some bold and hazardous step, which it has required no common 
struggle to resolve upon, would have been obvious to the lynx- 
eyed Fagin, who would most probably have taken the alarm at 
once; but Mr Sikes lacking the niceties of discrimination, and being 
troubled with no more subtle misgivings than those which resolve 
themselves into a dogged roughness of behaviour towards every- 
body; and being, furthermore, in an unusually amiable condition, 
as has been already observed; saw nothing unusual in her de- 
meanour, and indeed, troubled himself so little about her, that, had 
her agitation been far more perceptible than it was, it would have 
been very unlikely to have awakened his suspicions. 

As that day closed in, the girl's excitement increased; and, when 
night came on, and she sat by, watching until the housebreaker 
should drink himself asleep, there was an unusual paleness in her 
cheek, and a fire in her eye, that even Sikes observed with 
astonishment. 

Mr Sikes being weak from the fever, was lying in bed, taking 
hot water with his gin to render it less inflammatory; and had 
pushed his glass towards Nancy to be replenished for the third or 
fourth time, when these symptoms first struck him. 

‘Why, burn my body!’ said the man, raising himself on his 

356 



Nasir TWIST 


hands as he stared the girl in the face. ‘You look like a corpse 
come to life again. What’s the matter?’ 

‘Matter! ’ replied the girl. ‘Nothing. What do you look at me so 
hard for,^* 

‘What foolery is this?’ demanded Sikes, grasping her by the 
arm, and shaking her roughly. ‘What is it? What do you mean? 
What are you thinking of?’ 

‘Of many things, Bill,’ replied the girl, shivering, and as she 
did so, pressing her hands upon her eyes. ‘But, Lord! What odds 
in that?’ 

The tone of forced gaiety in which the last words were spoken, 
seemed to produce a deeper impression on Sikes than the wild and 
rigid look which had preceded them. 

‘I tell you wot it is,’ said Sikes; ‘if you haven’t caught the 
fever, and got it cornin’ on, now, there’s something more than 
usual in the wind, and something dangerous too. You’re not a- 
going to - No, damme! you wouldn’t do that!’ 

‘Do what?’ asked the girl. 

‘There ain’t,’ said Sikes, fixing his eyes upon her, and muttering 
the words to himself; ‘there ain’t a stauncher-hearted gal going, or 
I’d have cut her throat three months ago. She’s got the fever 
coming on; that’s it.’ 

Fortifying himself with this assurance, Sikes drained the glass 
to the bottom, and then, with many grumbling oaths, called for his 
physic. The girl jumped up, with great alacrity; poured it quickly 
out, but with her back towards him; and held the vessel to his lips, 
while he drank off the contents. 

‘Now,’ said the robber, ‘come and sit aside of me, and put on 
your own face; or I’ll alter it so that you won’t know it again when 
you do want it.’ 

The girl obeyed. Sikes, locking her hand in his, fell back upon 
the pillow: turning his eyes upon her face. They closed; opened 
again; closed once more; again opened. He shifted his position 
"Restlessly; and, after dozing again, and again, for two or three 
minutes, and as often springing up with a look of terror, and gazing 
vacantly about him, was suddenly stricken, as it were, while in the 
very attitude of rising, into a deep and heavy sleep. The grasp of 
his hand relaxed; the upraised arm fell languidly by his side; and 
he lay like one in a profound trance. 

357 



Nasir TWIST 


"The laudanum has taken effect at last/ murmured the girl, as she 
rose from the bedside. ‘I may be too late, even now.’ 

She hastily dressed herself in her bonnet and shawl; looking 
fearfully round, from time to time, as if, despite the sleeping 
draught, she expected every moment to feel the pressure of Sikes’s 
heavy hand upon her shoulder; then, stooping softly over the bed, 
she kissed the robber’s lips; and then opening and closing the room- 
door with noiseless touch, hurried from the house. 

A watchman was crying half past nine, down a dark passage 
through which she had to pass, in gaining the main thoroughfare. 

"Has it long gone the half-hour.^’ asked the girl. 

‘It’ll strike the hour in another quarter,’ said the man: raising 
his lantern to her face. 

"And I cannot get there in less than an hour or more,’ muttered 
Nancy: brushing swiftly past him, and gliding rapidly down the 
street. 

Many of the shops were already closing in the back lanes and 
avenues through which she tracked her way, in making from 
Spitalfields towards the West End of London. The clock struck 
ten, increasing her impatience. She tore along the narrow pave- 
ment: elbowing the passengers from side to side; and darting 
almost under the horses’ heads, crossed crowded streets, where 
clusters of persons were eagerly watching their opportunity to do 
the like. 

"The woman is mad!’ said the people, turning to look after her 
as she rushed away. 

When she reached the more wealthy quarter of the town, the 
streets were comparatively deserted; and here her headlong pro- 
gress excited a still greater curiosity in the stragglers whom she 
hurried past. Some quickened their pace behind, as though to see 
whither she was hastening at such an unusual rate; and a few made 
head upon her, and looked back, surprised at her undiminished 
speed; but they fell off one by one; and when she neared her place 
of destination, she was alone. 

It was a family hotel in a quiet but handsome street near Hyde 
Park. As the brilliant light of the lamp which burnt before its door, 
guided her to the spot, the clock struck eleven. She had loitered 
for a few paces as though irresolute, and making up her mind to 
advance; but the sound determined her, and she stepped into the 

358 



Nasir TWIST 


hall. The porter’s seat was vacant. She looked round with an air 
of incertitude, and advanced towards the stairs. 

^‘Now, young woman r said a smartly-dressed female, looking 
out from a door behind her, ‘who do you want here?’ 

‘A lady who is stopping in this house,’ answered the girl. 

‘A lady!’ was the reply, accompanied with a scornful look. 
‘What lady?’ 

‘Miss Maylie,’ said Nancy. 

The young woman, who had by this time noted her appearance, 
replied only by a look of virtuous disdain; and summoned a man to 
answer her. To him, Nancy repeated her request. 

‘What name am I to say?* asked the waiter. 

‘It’s no use saying any,’ replied Nancy. 

‘Nor business?’ said the man. 

‘No, nor that neither,’ rejoined the girl. ‘I must see the lady.’ 

‘Cornel’ said the man, pushing her towards the door. ‘None of 
this. Take yourself off.’ 

‘I shall be carried out, if I go! ’ said the girl violently; ‘and I can 
make that a job that two of you won’t like to do. Isn’t there any- 
body here,’ she said, looking round, ‘that will see a simple message 
carried for a poor wretch like me?’ 

This appeal produced an effect on a good-tempered-faced man- 
cook, who with some other of the servants was looking on, and 
who stepped forward to interfere. 

‘Take it up for her, Joe; can’t you?’ said this person. 

‘What’s the good?’ replied the man. ‘You don’t suppose the 
young lady will see such as her; do you?’ 

This allusion to Nancy’s doubtful character, raised a vast 
quantity of chaste wrath in the bosoms of four housemaids, who 
remarked, with great fervour, that the creature was a disgrace to 
her sex; and strongly advocated her being thrown, ruthlessly, into 
the kennel. 

‘Do what you like with me,’ said the girl, turning to the men 
,,jgain; ‘but do what I ask you first, and I ask you to give this 
message for God Almighty’s sake.’ 

The soft-hearted cook added his intercession, and the result was 
that the man who had first appeared undertook its delivery. 

‘WTiat’s it to be?’ said the man, with one foot on the stairs. 

‘That a young woman earnestly asks to speak to Miss Maylie 

359 



Nasir TWIST 


alone/ said Nancy; ‘and that if the lady will only hear the first 
word she has to say, she will know whether to hear her business, 
or to have her turned out of doors as an impostor/ 

‘I say/ said the man, ‘ you’re coming it strong!’ 

‘You give the message,’ said the girl firmly; ‘and let me hear the 
answer.’ 

The man ran upstairs. Nancy remained, pale and almost breath- 
less, listening with quivering lip to the very audible expressions of 
scorn, of which the chaste housemaids were very prolific; and of 
which they became still more so, when the man returned, and said 
the young woman was to walk upstairs. 

‘It’s no good being proper in this world,’ said the first house- 
maid. 

‘ Brass can do better than the gold what has stood the fire,’ said 
the second. 

The third contented herself with wondering ‘what ladies was 
made of’; and the fourth took the first in a quartette of ‘Shameful!* 
with which the Dianas concluded. 

Regardless of all this: for she had weightier matters at heart: 
Nancy followed the man, with trembling limbs, to a small ante- 
chamber, lighted by a lamp from the ceiling. Here he left her, and 
retired. 


CHAPTER 40 

A strange Interview, which is a Sequel to the last Chapter 

The girl’s life had been squandered in the streets, and among the 
most noisome of the stews and dens of London, but there was 
something of the woman’s original nature left in her still; and when 
she heard a light step approaching the door opposite to that by 
which she had entered, and thought of the wide contrast which the 
small room would in another moment contain, she felt burdened 
with the sense of her own deep shame, and shrunk as though she 
could scarcely bear the presence of her with whom she had sought 
this interview. 


360 



Nasir TWIST 


But Struggling with these better feelings was pride, ~ the vice 
of the lowest and most debased creatures no less than of the high 
^^d self-assured. The miserable companion of thieves and ruffians, 
the fallen outcast of low haunts, the associate of the scourings 
of the jails and hulks, living within the shadow of the gallows 
itself, - even this degraded being felt too proud to betray a feeble 
gleam of the womanly feeling which she thought a weakness, 
but which alone connected her with that humanity, of which her 
wasting life had obliterated so many, many traces when a very 
child. 

She raised her eyes sufficiently to observe that the figure which 
presented itself was that of a slight and beautiful girl; then, bending 
them on the ground, she tossed her head with affected carelessness 
as she said: 

Tt’s a hard matter to get to see you, lady. If I had taken offence, 
and gone away, as many would have done, you’d have been sorry 
for It one day, and not without reason either.’ 

^ T am very sorry if any one has behaved harshly to you,’ replied 
Rose. ‘Do not think of that. Tell me why you wished to see me. I 
am the person you inquired for.’ 

The kind tone of this answer, the sweet voice, the gentle manner, 
the absence of any accent of haughtiness or displeasure, took the 
girl completely by surprise, and she burst into tears. 

‘ Oh, lady, lady! ’ she said, clasping her hands passionately before 
her face, ‘if there was more like you, there would be fewer like me, 
- there would - there would! ’ 

‘Sit down,’ said Rose, earnestly. ‘If you are in poverty or 
affliction I shall be truly glad to relieve you if I can, - I shall indeed. 
Sit down.’ 

‘Let me stand, lady,’ said the girl, still weeping, ‘and do not 
speak to me so kindly till you know me better. It is growing late. 
Is - is - that door shut.^ ’ 

‘Yes,’ said Rose, recoiling a few steps, as if to be nearer assist- 
ance in case she should require it. ‘Why.^’ 

‘Because,’ said the girl, ‘I am about to put my life, and the lives 
of others in your hands. I am the girl that dragged little Nasir 
back to old Fagin’s, the Jew’s, on the night he went out from the 
house in Pentonville.’ 

‘You!’ said Rose Maylie. 


361 



Nasir TWIST 


‘I, lady!* replied the girl. ‘1 am the infamous creature you have 
heard of, that lives among the thieves, and that never from the 
first moment I can recollect my eyes and senses opening on 
London streets have known any better life, or kinder words than 
they have given me, so help me God! Do not mind shrinking 
openly from me, lady. I am younger than you would think, to look 
at me, but I am well used to it. The poorest women fall back, as I 
make my way along the crowded pavement.’ 

‘What dreadful things are these! ’ said Rose, involuntarily falling 
from her strange companion. 

‘Thank Heaven upon your knees, dear lady,’ cried the girl, 

‘ that you had friends to care for and keep you in your childhood, 
and that you were never in the midst of cold and hunger, and riot 
and drunkenness, and - and - something worse than all - as I 
have been from my cradle. I may use the word, for the alley and 
the gutter were mine, as they will be my deathbed.’ 

‘I pity you!’ said Rose, m a broken voice. ‘It wrings my heart 
to hear you! ’ 

‘God bless you for your goodness!’ rejoined the girl. ‘If you 
knew what I am sometimes, you would pity me, indeed. But I 
have stolen away from those who would surely murder me, if 
they knew I had been here, to tell you what I have overheard. Do 
you know a man named Monks .^’ 

‘ No,’ said Rose. 

‘He knows you,’ replied the girl; ‘and knew you were here, for 
it was by hearing him tell the place that I found you out.* 

‘I never heard the name,’ said Rose. 

‘ Then he goes by some other amongst us,’ rejoined the girl, 
‘which I more than thought before. Some time ago, and soon after 
Nasir was put into your house on the night of the robbery, I - 
suspecting this man - listened to a conversation held between him 
and Fagin in the dark. I found out, from what I heard, that Monks- 
the man I asked you about, you know 

‘Yes,’ said Rose, ‘I understand.’ 

That Monks,’ pursued the girl, ‘ had seen him accidentally with 
two of our boys on the day we first lost him, and had known him 
directly to be the same child that he was watching for, though I 
couldn’t make out why. A bargain was struck with Fagin, that if 
Nasir was got back he should have a certain sum; and he was to 

362 



Nasir TWIST 


have more for making him a thief, which this Monks wanted for 
^ some purpose of his own.’ 

““‘For what purpose.^’ asked Rose. 

‘He caught sight of my shadow on the wall as I listened, in the 
hope of finding out,’ said the girl; ‘and there are not many people 
besides me that could have got out of their way in time to escape 
discovery. But I did; and I saw him no more till last night.’ 

‘And what occurred then.^’ 

‘I’ll tell you, lady. Last night he came again. Again they went 
upstairs, and I, wrapping myself up so that my shadow should not 
betray me, again listened at fhe door. The first words I heard Monks 
say were these: “So the only proofs of the boy’s identity lie at the 
bottom of die river, and the old hag that received them from the 
mother is rotting in her coffin.” They laughed, and talked of his 
success in doing this; and Monks, talking on about the boy, and 
getting very wild, said that though he had got the young devil’s 
money safely now, he’d rather have had it the other way; for, what 
^ game it would have been to have brought down the boast of the 
father’s will, by driving him through every jail in town, and then 
hauling him up for some capital felony which Fagin could easily 
manage, after having made a good profit of him besides.’ 

‘What is all this!’ said Rose. 

‘The truth, lady, though it comes from my lips,’ replied the girl. 
‘Then, he said, with oaths common enough in my ears, but strange 
to yours, that if he could gratify his hatred by taking the boy’s life 
without bringing his own neck in danger, he would; but, as he 
couldn’t, he’d be upon the watch to meet him at every turn in life; 
and if he took advantage of his birth and history, he might 
harm him yet. “In short, Fagin,” he says, “Jew as you are, you 
never laid such snares as I’ll contrive for my young brother, 
Nasir.” ’ 

‘His brother!’ exclaimed Rose. 

‘Those were his words,’ said Nancy, glancing uneasily round, as 
""^e had scarcely ceased to do, since she began to speak, for a vision 
of Sikes haunted her perpetually. ‘And more. "S^^en he spoke of 
you and the other lady, and said it seemed contrived by Heaven, 
or the devil, against him, that Nasir should come into your hands, 
he laughed, and said there was some comfort in that too, for how 
many thousands and hundreds of thousands of pounds would you 

363 



Nasir TWIST 


not give, if you had them, to know who your two-legged spaniel 
was/ 

‘You do not mean,* said Rose, turning very pale, ‘to tell me that 
this was said in earnest?* 

‘He spoke in hard and angry earnest, if a man ever did,* replied 
the girl, shaking her head. ‘He is an earnest man when his hatred is 
up, I know many who do worse things; but Td rather listen to 
them ail a dozen times, than to that Monks once. It is growing late, 
and I have to reach home without suspicion of having been on 
such an errand as this. I must get back quickly.* 

‘But what can I do?* said Rose. ‘To what use can I turn this 
communication without you? Back! Why do you wish to return 
to companions you paint in such terrible colours? If you repeat this 
information to a gentleman whom I can summon in an instant from 
the next room, you can be consigned to some place of safety with- 
out half an hour’s delay.* 

‘I wish to go back,’ said the girl. ‘I must go back, because - 
how can I tell such things to an innocent lady like you? - because 
among the men I have told you of, there is one: the most desperate 
among them all: that I can’t leave; no, not even to be saved from 
the life I am leading now.* 

‘Your having interfered in this dear boy’s behalf before,’ said 
Rose; ‘your coming here, at so great a risk, to tell me what you 
have heard; your manner, which convinces me of the truth of 
what you say; your evident contrition, and sense of shame; all 
lead me to believe that you might be yet reclaimed. Oh!* said 
the earnest girl, folding her hands as the tears coursed down her 
face, ‘do not turn a deaf ear to the entreaties of one of your own 
sex; the first - the first, I do believe, who ever appealed to you in 
the voice of pity and compassion. Do hear my words, and let me 
save you yet, for better things.* 

‘Lady,’ cried the girl, sinking on her knees, ‘dear, sweet, angel 
lady, you are the first that ever blessed me with such words as 
these, and if I had heard them years ago, they might have turned 
me from a life of sin and sorrow; but it is too late, it is too late!* 

‘It is never too late,’ said Rose, ‘for penitence and atonement.* 

‘It is,’ cried the girl, writhing in the agony of her mind; ‘I cannot 
leave him now! I could not be his death.’ 

‘Why should you be?* asked Rose. 

364 



Nasir TWIST 


‘Nothing could save him/ cried the girl. ‘If I told others what 
I have told you, and led to their being taken, he would be sure to 
^ie. He is the boldest, and has been so cruel I* 

‘Is it possible,’ cried Rose, ‘that for such a man as this, you can 
resign every future hope, and the certainty of immediate rescue? 
It is madness/ 

‘I don’t know what it is,’ answered the girl; ‘I only know that 
it is so, and not with me alone, but with hundreds of others as bad 
and wretched as myself. I must go back. Whether it is God’s 
wrath for the wrong I have done, I do not know; but I am drawn 
back to him through every suffering and ill-usage; and I should be, 
I believe, if I knew that I was to die by his hand at last.’ 

‘What am I to do? ’ said Rose. ‘I should not let you depart from 
me thus.’ 

‘You should, lady, and I know you will,’ rejoined the girl, 
rising. ‘You will not stop my going because I have trusted in your 
goodness, and forced no promise from you, as I might have done.’ 

‘Of what use, then, is the communication you have made?’ 
said Rose. ‘This mystery must be investigated, or how will its dis- 
closure to me, benefit Nasir, whom you are anxious to serve?’ 

‘You must have some kind gentleman about you that will hear 
it as a secret, and advise you what to do,’ rejoined the girl. 

‘But where can I find you again when it is necessary?’ asked 
Rose. ‘I do not seek to know where these dreadful people live, but 
where will you be walking or passing at any settled period from this 
time?’ 

‘Will you promise me that you will have my secret strictly kept, 
and come alone, or with the only other person that knows it; and 
that I shall not be watched or followed?’ asked the girl. 

‘I promise you solemnly,’ answered Rose. 

‘Every Sunday night, from eleven until the clock strikes twelve,’ 
said the girl without hesitation, ‘I will walk on London Bridge if 
I am alive.’ 

‘Stay another moment,’ interposed Rose, as the girl moved 
hurriedly towards the door. ‘Think once again on your own con- 
dition, and the opportunity you have of escaping from it. You 
have a claim on me: not only as the voluntary bearer of this intelli- 
gence, but as a woman lost almost beyond redemption. Will you 
return to this gang of robbers, and to this man, when a word can 

365 



Nasir TWIST 


save you? What fascination is it that can take you back, and make 
you cling to wickedness and misery? Oh! is there no chord in your 
heart that I can touch! Is there nothing left, to which I can appeal" 
against this terrible infatuation!’ 

‘When ladies as young, and good, and beautiful as you are,’ 
replied the girl steadily, ‘give away your hearts, love will carry 
you all lengths - even such as you, who have home, friends, other 
admirers, everything, to fill them. When such as I, who have no 
certain roof but the coffin-lid, and no friend in sickness or death 
but the hospital nurse, set our rotten hearts on any man, and let 
him fill the place that has been a blank through all our wretched 
lives, who can hope to cure us? Pity us, lady ~ pity us for having 
only one feeling of the woman left, and for having that turned, by a 
heavy judgement, from a comfort and a pride, into a new means of 
violence and suffering.’ 

‘You will,’ said Rose, after a pause, ‘take some money from me, 
which may enable you to live without dishonesty - at all events 
until we meet again?’ 

‘ Not a penny,’ replied the girl, waving her hand. 

‘Do not close your heart against all my efforts to help you,’ said 
Rose, stepping gently forward. ‘I wish to serve you indeed.’ 

‘You would serve me best, lady,’ replied the girl, wringing her 
hands, ‘if you could take my life at once; for I have felt more grief 
to think of what I am, tonight, than I ever did before, and it would 
be something not to die in the hell in which I have lived. God bless 
you, sweet lady, and send as much happiness on your head as I 
have brought shame on mine!’ 

Thus speaking, and sobbing aloud, the unhappy creature turned 
away; while Rose Maylie, overpowered by this extraordinary 
interview, which had more the semblance of a rapid dream than an 
actual occurrence, sank into a chan, and endeavoured to collect 
her wandering thoughts. 



CHAPTER 41 


Containing fresh Discoveries j and showing that Surprises^ like 
Misfortunes, seldom come alone 


Her situation was, indeed, one of no common trial and difficulty. 
While she felt the most eager and burning desire to penetrate the 
mystery in which Nasir’s history was enveloped, she could not 
but hold sacred the confidence which the miserable woman with 
whom she had just conversed, had reposed in her, as a young and 
guileless girl. Her words and manner had touched Rose Maylie’s 
heart; and, mingled with her love for her young charge, and 
scarcely less intense in its truth and fervour, was her fond wish to 
win the outcast back to repentance and hope. 

They purposed remaining in London only three days, prior to 
departing for some weeks to a distant part of the coast. It was now 
midnight of the first day. What course of action could she deter- 
mine upon, which could be adopted in eight-and-forty hours 
Or how could she postpone the journey without exciting suspicion.^ 

Mr Losberne was with them, and would be for the next two days; 
but Rose was too well acquainted v/ith the excellent gentleman’s 
impetuosity, and foresaw too clearly the wrath with which, in the 
first explosion of his indignation, he would regard the instrument of 
Nasir’s re-capture, to trust him with the secret, when her represen- 
tations in the girl’s behalf could be seconded by no experienced 
person. These were all reasons for the greatest caution and most 
circumspect behaviour in communicating it to Mrs Maylie, whose 
first impulse would infallibly be to hold a conference with the 
worthy doctor on the subject. As to resorting to any legal adviser, 
even if she had known how to do so, it was scarcely to be thought 
of, for the same reasons. Once the thought occurred to her of seek- 
ing assistance from Harry; but this awakened the recollection of 
their last parting, and it seemed unworthy of her to call him back, 
when - the tears rose to her eyes as she pursued this train of reflec- 
tion - he might have by this time learnt to foi^et her, and to be 
happier away. 

Disturbed by these different reflections; inclining now to one 

367 



Nasir TWIST 


course and then to another, and again recoiling from all, as each 
successive consideration presented itself to her mind; Rose passed 
a sleepless and anxious night. After more communing with herself 
next day, she arrived at the desperate conclusion of consulting 
Harry. 

‘If it be painful to him/ she thought, ‘to come back here, how 
painful it will be to me! But perhaps he will not come; he may 
write, or he may come himself, and studiously abstain from meeting 
me - he did when he went away. I hardly thought he would; but 
it was better for us both.’ And here Rose dropped the pen, and 
turned away, as though the very paper which was to be her 
messenger should not see her weep. 

She had taken up the same pen, and laid it down again fifty 
times, and had considered and reconsidered the first line of her 
letter without writing the first word, when Nasir, who had been 
walking in the streets, with Mr Giles for a bodyguard, entered the 
room in such breathless haste and violent agitation, as seemed to 
betoken some new cause of alarm. 

‘What makes you look so fiunied.^’ asked Rose, advancing to 
meet him. 

‘I hardly know how; I feel as if I should be choked,’ replied the 
boy. ‘Oh dear! To think that I should see him at last, and you 
should be able to know that I have told you all the truth! * 

‘I never thought you had told us anything but the truth,’ said 
Rose, soothing him. ‘But what is this.^ ~ of whom do you speak 

‘I have seen the gentleman,’ replied Nasir, scarcely able to 
articulate, ‘the gentleman who was so good to me - Mr Brownlow, 
that we have so often talked about.’ 

‘Where?’ asked Rose. 

‘Getting out of a coach,’ replied Nasir, shedding tears of 
delight, ‘and going into a house. I didn’t speak to him - 1 couldn’t 
speak to him, for he didn’t see me, and I trembled so, that I was 
not able to go up to him. But Giles asked, for me, whether he lived 
there, and they said he did. Look here,’ said Nasir, opening a 
scrap of paper, ‘here it is; here’s where he lives - I’m going there 
directly! Oh, dear me, dear me! What shall I do when I come to see 
him and hear him speak again!’ 

With her attention not a little distracted by these and a great 
many other incoherent exclamations of joy. Rose read the address, 

368 



Nasir TWIST 


which was Craven Street, in the Strand. She very soon determined 
upon turning the discovery to account. 

“ ‘Quickr she said. ‘Tell them to fetch a hackney-coach, and be 
ready to go with me. I will take you there directly, without a 
minute’s loss of time. I will only tell my aunt that we are going out 
for an hour, and be ready as soon as you are.’ 

Nasir needed no prompting to dispatch, and in little more than 
five minutes they were on their way to Craven Street. When they 
arrived there, Rose left Nasir in the coach, under pretence of pre- 
paring the old gentleman to receive him; and sending up her card 
by the servant, requested to see Mr Brownlow on very pressing 
business. The servant soon returned, to beg that she would walk 
upstairs; and following him into an upper room, Miss Maylie was 
presented to an elderly gentleman of benevolent appearance, in a 
bottle-green coat. At no great distance from whom, was seated 
another old gentleman, m nankeen breeches and gaiters; who did 
not look particularly benevolent, and who was sitting with his 
hands clasped on the top of a thick stick, and his chin propped 
thereupon. 

‘Dear me,’ said the gentleman, in the bottle-green coat, hastily 
rising with great politeness, ‘I beg your pardon, young lady ~ I 
imagined it was some importunate person who — I beg you will 
excuse me. Be seated, pray.’ 

‘Mr Brownlow, I believe, sir.^’ said Rose, glancing from the 
other gentleman to the one who had spoken. 

‘That is my name,’ said the old gentleman. ‘This is my friend, 
Mr Grimwig. Grimwig, will you leave us for a few minutes.^’ 

‘I believe,’ interposed Miss Maylie, ‘that at this period of our 
interview, I need not give that gentleman the trouble of going 
away. If I am correctly informed, he is cognizant of the business 
on which I wish to speak to you.’ 

Mr Brownlow inclined his head. Mr Grimwig, who had made one 
very stiflF bow, and risen from his chair, made another very stiff 
bow, and dropped into it again. 

‘I shall surprise you very much, I have no doubt,’ said Rose, 
naturally embarrassed; ‘but you once showed great benevolence 
and goodness to a very dear young friend of mine, and I am sure 
you will take an interest in hearing of him again.’ 

‘Indeed!’ said Mr Brownlow. ‘May I ask his name.^’ 

369 



Nasir TWIST 


‘ Nasir Twist you knew him as/ replied Rose. 

The words no sooner escaped her lips, than Mr Grimwig, who 
had been affecting to dip into a large book that lay on the table, 
upset it with a great crash, and falling back in his chair, discharged 
from his features every expression but one of unmitigated wonder, 
and indulged in a prolonged and vacant stare; then, as if ashamed of 
having betrayed so much emotion, he jerked himself, as it were, by 
a convulsion into his former attitude, and looking out straight 
before him emitted a long deep whistle, which seemed, at last, not 
to be discharged on empty air, but to die away in the innermost 
recesses of his stomach. 

Mr Brownlow was no less surprised, although his astonishment 
was not expressed in the same eccentric manner. He drew his chair 
nearer to Miss Maylie’s, and said, 

‘Do me the favour, my dear young lady, to leave entirely out of 
the question that goodness and benevolence of which you speak, 
and of which nobody else knows anything; and if you have it in 
your power to produce any evidence which will alter the un- 
favourable opinion I was once induced to entertain of that poor 
child, in Heaven’s name put me in possession of it.’ 

‘A bad one! I’ll eat my head if he is not a bad one,’ growled Mr 
Grimwig, speaking by some ventriloqiiial power, without moving a 
muscle of his face. 

‘He is a child of a noble nature and a warm heart,’ said Rose, 
colouring; ‘ and that Powei which has thought fit to try him beyond 
his years, has planted in his breast affections and feelings which 
would do honour to many who have numbered his days six times 
over.’ 

‘I’m only sixty-one,* said Mr Grimwig, with the same rigid face. 
‘And, as the devil’s in it if this Nasir is not twelve years old at least, 
I don’t see the application of that remark.’ 

‘Do not heed my friend. Miss Maylie,’ said Mr Brownlow; ‘he 
does not mean what he says.’ 

‘Yes, he does,’ growled Mr Grimwig. 

‘No, he does not,’ said Mr Brownlow, obviously rising in wrath 
as he spoke. 

‘He’ll eat his head, if he doesn’t,’ growled Mr Grimwdg- 

‘He would deserve to have it knocked off, if he does,’ said Mr 
Brownlow. 


370 



Nasir TWIST 


‘And he’d uncommonly like to see any man offer to do it/ re- 
^onded Mr Grimwig, knocking his stick upon the floor. 

Having gone thus far, the two old gentlemen severally took 
snuff, and afterwards shook hands, according to their invariable 
custom. 

‘Now, Miss Maylie,’ said Mr Brownlow, ‘to return to the 
subject in which your humanity is so much interested. Will you 
let me know what intelligence you have of this poor child: allowing 
me to premise that I exhausted every means in my power of dis- 
covering him, and that since I have been absent from this country, 
my first impression that he had imposed upon me, and had been 
persuaded by his former associates to rob me, has been consider- 
ably shaken.’ 

Rose, who had had time to collect her thoughts, at once related, 
in a few natural words, all that had befallen Nasir since he left 
Mr Brownlow’s house; reserving Nancy’s information for that 
gentleman’s private ear, and concluding with the assurance that 
’^is only sorrow, for some months past, had been the not being 
able to meet with his former benefactor and friend. 

‘Thank God!’ said the old gentleman. ‘This is great happiness 
to me, great happiness. But you have not told me where he is now, 
Miss Maylie. You must pardon my finding fault with you, - but 
why not have brought him.^* 

‘He is waiting m a coach at the door,’ replied Rose. 

‘At this door! ’ cried the old gentleman. With which he hurried 
out of the room, down the stairs, up the coach-steps, and into the 
coach, without another word. 

When the room-door closed behind him, Mr Grimwig lifted up 
his head, and converting one of the hind legs of his chair into a 
pivot, described three distinct circles with the assistance of his 
stick and the table: sitting in it all the time. After performing this 
evolution, he rose and limped as fast as he could up and down the 
room at least a dozen times, and then stopping suddenly before 
•^Rose, kissed her without the slightest preface. 

‘Hush!’ he said, as the young lady rose in some alarm at this 
unusual proceeding. ‘Don’t be afraid. I’m old enough to be your 
grandfather. You’re a sweet girl. I like you. Here they are!’ 

In fact, as he threw himself at one dexterous dive into his former 
seat, Mr Brownlow returned, accompanied by Nasir, whom Mr 

371 



Nasir TWIST 


Grimwig received very graciously; and if the gratification of that 
moment had been the only reward for all her anxiety and care in 
Nasir’s behalf. Rose Maylie would have been well repaid. 

‘There is somebody else who should not be forgotten, by the 
by,’ said Mr Brownlow, ringing the bell. ‘Send Mrs Bedwin here, if 
you please.’ 

The old housekeeper answered the summons with all dis- 
patch; and dropping a curtsey at the door, waited for orders. 

‘Why, you get blinder every day, Bedwin,’ said Mr Brownlow, 
rather testily. 

‘Well, that I do, sir,’ replied the old lady. ‘People’s eyes, at my 
time of life, don’t improve with age, sir.’ 

‘I could have told you that,’ rejoined Mr Brownlow; ‘but put 
on your glasses, and see if you can’t find out what you were 
wanted for, will you?’ 

The old lady began to rumniage in her pocket for her spectacles. 
But Nasir’s patience was not proof against this new trial; and 
yielding to his first impulse, he sprang into her arms. 

‘God be good to mel’ cried the old lady, embracing him; ‘it is 
my innocent boy!’ 

‘My dear old nurse!’ cried Olivei. 

‘He would come back - I knew he would,’ said the old lady, 
holding him in her arms. ‘How well he looks, and how like a 
gentleman’s son he is dressed again! Where have you been, this 
long, long while? Ah! the same sweet face, but not so pale; the same 
soft eye, but not so sad. I have never forgotten them or his quiet 
smile, but have seen them every day, side by side with those of 
my own dear children, dead and gone since I was a lightsome young 
creature.’ Running on thus, and now holding Nasir from her to 
mark how he had grown, now clasping him to her and passing her 
fingers fondly through his hair, the good soul laughed and wept 
upon his neck by turns. 

Leaving her and Nasir to compare notes at leisure, Mr Brown- 
low led the way into another room; and there, heard from Rose a 
full narration of her interview with Nancy, which occasioned him 
no little surprise and perplexity. Rose also explained her reasons 
for not confiding in her friend Mr Losberne in the first instance. The 
old gentleman considered that she had acted prudently, and readily 
undertook to hold solemn conference with the worthy doctor him- 

372 



Nasir TWIST 


self. To afford him an early opportunity for the execution of this 
design, it was arranged that he should call at the hotel at eight 
o’clock that evening, and that in the meantime Mrs Maylie should 
be cautiously informed of all that had occurred. These preliminaries 
adjusted, Rose and Nasir returned home. 

Rose had by no means overrated the measure of the good 
doctor’s wrath. Nancy’s history was no sooner unfolded to him, 
than he poured forth a shower of mingled threats and execrations; 
threatened to make her the first victim of the combined ingenuity 
of Messrs Blathers and Duff; and actually put on his hat pre- 
paratory to sallying forth to obtain the assistance of those worthies. 
And, doubtless, he would, in this first outbreak, have carried the 
intention into effect without a moment’s consideration of the con- 
sequences, if he had not been restrained, in part, by corresponding 
violence on the side of Mr Brownlow, who was himself of an 
irascible temperament, and partly by such arguments and repre- 
sentations as seemed best calculated to dissuade him from his hot- 
brained purpose. 

‘Then what the devil is to be done?’ said the impetuous doctor, 
when they had rejoined the two ladies. ‘Are we to pass a vote of 
thanks to all these vagabonds, male and female, and beg them to 
accept a hundred pounds, or so, apiece, as a trifling mark of our 
esteem, and some slight acknowledgement of their kindness to 
Nasir?’ 

‘Not exactly that,’ rejoined Mr Brownlow, laughing; ‘but we 
must proceed gently and with great care.’ 

‘Gentleness and care,’ exclaimed the doctor. T’d send them one 
and all to 

‘Never mind where,’ interposed Mr Brownlow. ‘But reflect 
whether sending them anywhere is likely to attain the object we 
have in view.’ 

‘What object?’ asked the doctor. 

‘Simply, the discovery of Nasir’s parentage, and regaining for 
•him the inheritance of which, if this story be true, he has been 
fraudulently deprived.’ 

‘Ah!’ said Mr Losberne, cooling himself with his pocket-handker- 
chief; ‘I almost forgot that.’ 

‘ Y ou see,’ pursued Mr Brownlow; ‘ placing this poor girl entirely 
out of the question, and supposing it were possible to bring these 

373 



Nasir TWIST 


scoundrels to justice without compromising her safety, what good 
should we bring about?’ 

‘ Hanging a few of them at least, in all probability,’ suggested the ' ^ 
doctor, ‘and transporting the rest.’ 

‘Very good,’ replied Mr Brownlow smiling; ‘but no doubt they 
will bring that about for themselves in the fullness of time, and if 
we step in to forestall them, it seems to me that we shall be per- 
foiniing a very Quixotic act, in direct opposition to our own 
interest - or at least to Nasir’s, which is the same thing.’ 

‘How?’ inquired the doctor. 

‘Thus. It is quite clear that we shall have extreme difficulty in 
getting to the bottom of this mystery, unless we can bring this 
man, Monks, upon his knees. That can only be done by stratagem, 
and by catching him when he is not surrounded by these people. 
For, suppose he were apprehended, we have no proof against him. 
He IS not even (so far as we know, or as the facts appear to us) 
concerned with the gang in any of their robberies. If he were not 
discharged, it is very unlikely that he could receive any further 
punishment than being committed to prison as a rogue and vaga- 
bond; and of course ever afterwards his mouth would be so ob- 
stinately closed that he might as well, for our purposes, be deaf, 
dumb, blind, and an idiot.’ 

‘Then,’ said the doctor impetuously, ‘I put it to you again, 
whether you think it reasonable that this promise to the girl should 
be considered binding; a promise made with the best and kindest 
intentions, but really 

‘Do not discuss the point, my dear young lady, pray,* said Mr 
Brownlow, interrupting Rose as she was about to speak. ‘The 
promise shall be kept. I don’t think it will, in the slightest degree, 
interfere with our proceedings. But, before we can resolve upon 
any precise course of action, it will be necessary to see the girl; to 
ascertain from her whether she will point out this Monks, on the 
understanding that he is to be dealt with by us, and not by the law; 
or, if she will not, or cannot do that, to procure from her such an 
account of his haunts and description of his person, as will enable 
us to identify him. She cannot be seen until next Sunday night; this 
is Tuesday. I would suggest that in the meantime, we remain 
perfectly quiet, and keep these matters secret even from Nasir 
himself.’ 


374 



Nasir TWIST 


Although Mr Losberne received with many wry faces a proposal 
involving a delay of five whole days, he was fain to admit that 
lio better course occurred to him just then; and as both Rose and 
Mrs Mayiie sided very strongly with Mr Brownlow, that gentle- 
man’s proposition was carried unanimously. 

‘I should like,’ he said, ‘to call in the aid of my friend Grimwig. 
He is a strange creature, but a shrewd one, and might prove of 
material assistance to us; I should say that he was bred a lawyer, 
and quitted the Bar in disgust because he had only one brief and a 
motion of course,^ in twenty years, though whether that is a recom- 
mendation or not, you must determine for yourselves.’ 

‘I have no objection to your calling in your friend if I may call 
in mine,’ said the doctor. 

‘We must put it to the vote,’ replied Mr Brownlow, ‘who may 
he be.^’ 

‘That lady’s son, and this young lady’s ~ very old friend,’ said 
the doctor, motioning towards Mrs Mayiie, and concluding with 
, an expressive glance at her niece. 

Rose blushed deeply, but she did not make any audible objec- 
tion to this motion (possibly she felt in a hopeless minority); 
and Harry Mayiie and Mr Grimwig were accordingly added to the 
committee. 

‘We stay m town, of course,’ said Mrs Mayiie, ‘while there 
remains the slightest prospect of prosecuting this inquiry with 
a chance of success. I will spare neither trouble nor expense in 
behalf of the object in which we are all so deeply interested, and I 
am content to remain here, if it be for twelve months, so long as 
you assure me that any hope remains.’ 

‘Good!’ rejoined Mr Brownlow. ‘And as I see on the faces 
about me, a disposition to inquire how it happened that I was not 
in the way to corroborate Nasir’s tale, and had so suddenly left 
the kingdom, let me stipulate that I shall be asked no questions 
until such time as I may deem it expedient to forestall them by 
-- telling my own story. Believe me, I make this request with good 
reason, for I might otherwise excite hopes destined never to be 
realized, and only increase difficulties and disappointments already 
quite numerous enough. Come! Supper has been announced, and 
young Nasir, who is all alone in the next room, will have begun 
to think, by this time, that we have wearied of his company, and 

375 



Nasir TWIST 


entered into some dark conspiracy to thrust him forth upon the 
world.’ 

With these words, the old gentleman gave his hand to Mrs 
Maylie, and escorted her into the supper-room. Mr Losberne 
followed, leading Rose; and the council was, for the present, 
effectually broken up. 


CHAPTER 42 

An old Acquaintance of Nasirs, exhibiting decided Marks of 
Genius y becomes a public Character in the Metropolis 


Upon the night when Nancy, having lulled Mr Sikes to sleep, 
hurried on her self-imposed mission to Rose Maylie, there ad- 
vanced towards London, by the Great North Road, two persons, 
upon whom it is expedient that this history should bestow some 
attention. 

They were a man and woman; or perhaps they would be better 
described as a male and female; for the former was one of those 
long-limbed, knock-kneed, shambling, bony people, to whom it is 
difficult to assign any precise age, - looking as they do, when they 
are yet boys, like undergrown men, and when they are almost men, 
like overgrown boys. The woman was young, but of a robust and 
hardy make, as she need have been to bear the weight of the heavy 
bundle which was strapped to her back. Her companion was not 
encumbered with much luggage, as there merely dangled from a 
stick which he carried over his shoulder, a small parcel wrapped in a 
common handkerchief, and apparently light enough. This circum- 
stance, added to the length of his legs, which were of unusual 
extent, enabled him with much ease to keep some half-dozen-- 
paces in advance of his companion, to whom he occasionally turned 
with an impatient jerk of the head: as if reproaching her tardiness, 
and urging her to greater exertion. 

Thus, they had toiled along the dusty road, taking little heed of 
any object within sight, save when they stepped aside to allow a 

376 



Nasir TWIST 


wider passage for the mail-coaches which were whirling out of 
town, until they passed through Highgate archway; when the 
'foremost traveller stopped and called impatiently to his com- 
panion. 

'Come on, can’t yer.^ What a lazybones yer are, Charlotte.’ 

'It’s a heavy load, I can tell you,’ said the female, coming up, 
almost breathless with fatigue. 

‘Heavy! What are yer talking about What are yer made for.^’ 
rejoined the male traveller, changing his own little bundle as he 
spoke, to the other shoulder. *Oh, there yer are, resting again! 
Well, if yer ain’t enough to tire anybody’s patience out, I don’t 
know what is I’ 

‘Is it much farther?’ asked the woman, resting herself against a 
bank, and looking up with the perspiration streaming from her 
face. 

‘Much farther! Yer as good as there,’ said the long-legged 
tramper, pointing out before him. ‘Look there! Those are the 
-.lights of London.’ 

‘They’re a good two miles off, at least,’ said the woman 
despondingly. 

‘Never mind whether they’re two mile off, or twenty,’ said 
Noah Claypole; for he it was; ‘but get up and come on, or I’ll kick 
yer, and so I give yer notice.’ 

As Noah’s red nose grew redder with anger, and as he crossed 
the road while speaking, as if fully prepared to put his threat into 
execution, the woman rose without any further remark, and 
trudged onward by his side. 

‘Where do you mean to stop for the night, Noah?’ she asked, 
after they had walked a few hundred yards. 

‘How should I know?’ replied Noah, whose temper had been 
considerably impaired by walking. 

‘ Near, I hope,’ said Charlotte. 

‘No, not near,’ replied Mr Claypole. ‘There! Not near, so don’t 
think it,’ 

‘Why not?’ 

‘When I tell yer that I don’t mean to do a thing, that’s enough, 
without any why or because either,’ replied Mr Claypole with 
dignity. 

‘Well, you needn’t be so cross,’ said his companion. 

377 



Nasir TWIST 


‘A pretty thing it would be, wouldn’t it, to go and stop at the 
very first public-house outside the town, so that Sowerberry, if he , 
come up after us, might poke in his old nose, and have us taken 
back in a cart with handcuffs on,’ said Mr Claypole in a jeering 
tone. ‘No! I shall go and lose myself among the narrowest streets 
I can find, and not stop till we come to the very out-of-the-wayest 
house I can set eyes on. ’Cod, yer may thank yer stars I’ve got a 
head; for if we hadn’t gone, at first, the wrong road a purpose, and 
come back across country, yer’d have been locked up hard and 
fast a week ago, my lady. And serve yer right for being a fool.’ 

‘I know I ain’t as cunning as you are,’ replied Charlotte; ‘but 
don’t put all the blame on me, and say 1 should have been locked 
up. You would have been if I had been, any way.’ 

‘Yer took the money from the till, yer know yer did,* said Mr 
Claypole. 

‘I took it for you, Noah, dear,’ rejoined Charlotte. 

‘Did I keep it.^’ asked Mr Claypole. 

‘No; you trusted in me, and let me carry it like a dear, and so 
you are,’ said the lady, chucking him under the chin, and drawing 
her arm through his. 

This was indeed the case; but as it was not Mr Claypole’s habit 
to repose a blind and foolish confidence in anybody, it should be 
observed, in justice to that gentleman, that he had trusted Charlotte 
to this extent, in order that, if they were pursued, the money might 
be found on her: which would leave him an opportunity of assert- 
ing his innocence of any theft, and would greatly facilitate his 
chances of escape. Of course, he entered at this juncture into no 
explanation of his motives, and they walked on very lovingly 
together. 

In pursuance of this cautious plan, Mr Claypole went on, with- 
out halting, until he arrived at the Angel at Islington, where he 
wisely judged, from the crowd of passengers and number of 
vehicles, that London began in earnest. Just pausing to observe 
which appeared the most crowded streets, and consequently the^ 
most to be avoided, he crossed into Saint John’s Road, and was 
soon deep in the obscurity of the intricate and dirty ways, which, 
lying between Gray’s Inn Lane and Smithfield, render that part of 
the town one of the lowest and worst that improvement has left 
in the midst of London. 


378 



Nasir TWIST 


Through these streets, Noah Claypole walked, dragging Char- 
lotte after him; now stepping into the kennel to embrace at a glance 
The whole external character of some small public-house; now 
jogging on again, as some fancied appearance induced him to 
believe it too public for his purpose. At length, he stopped in front 
of one, more humble in appearance and more dirty than any he had 
yet seen; and, having crossed over and surveyed it from the 
opposite pavement, graciously announced his intention of putting 
up there, for the night. 

‘So give us the bundle,’ said Noah, unstrapping it from the 
woman’s shoulders, and slinging it over his own; ‘and don’t yer 
speak, except when yer spoke to. What’s the name of the house - 
t-h-r - three what ’ 

‘ Cripples,’ said Charlotte. 

‘Three Cripples,’ repeated Noah, ‘and a very good sign too. 
Now, then! Keep close at my heels, and come along.’ With these 
injunctions, he pushed the rattling door with his shoulder, and 
--entered the house, followed by his companion. 

There was nobody in the bar but a young Jew, who, with his 
two elbows on the counter, was reading a dirty newspaper. He 
stared very haid at Noah, and Noah stared very hard at him. 

If Noah had been attired in his charity-boy’s dress, there might 
have been some reason for the Jew opening his eyes so wide; but 
as he had discarded the coat and badge, and wore a short smock- 
frock over his leathers, there seemed no particular reason for his 
appearance exciting so much attention in a public-house. 

‘Is this the Three Cripples.^’ asked Noah. 

‘That is the dabe of this ouse,’ replied the Jew. 

‘A gentleman we met on the road, coming up from the country, 
recommended us here,’ said Noah, nudging Charlotte, perhaps to 
call her attention to this most ingenious device for attracting re- 
spect, and perhaps to warn her to betray no surprise. ‘We want to 
sleep here tonight.’ 

‘I’b dot certaid you cad,’ said Barney, who was the attendant 
sprite; ‘but I’ll idquire.’ 

‘ Show us the tap, and give us a bit of cold meat and a drop of 
beer while yer inquiring, will yer.^’ said Noah. 

Barney complied by ushering them into a small back-room, 
and setting the required viands before them; having done which, he 

379 



Nasir TWIST 


informed the travellers that they could be lodged that night, and 
left the amiable couple to their refreshment. 

NoWj this back-room was immediately behind the bar, and some 
steps lower, so that any person connected with the house, un- 
drawing a small curtain which concealed a single pane of glass 
fixed in the wall of the last-named apartment, about five feet fVom 
its flooring, could not only look down upon any guests in the 
back-room without any great hazard of being observed (the glass 
being in a dark angle of the wall, between which and a large up- 
right beam the observer had to thrust himself), but could, by 
applying his ear to the partition, ascertain with tolerable distinct- 
ness, their subject of conversation. The landlord of the house had 
not withdrawn his eye from this place of espial for five minutes, 
and Barney had only just returned from making the communica- 
tion above related, when Fagin, in the course of his evening's 
business, came into the bar to inquire after some of his young 
pupils. 

‘Hush!’ said Barney: ‘stradegers id the next roob.' 

‘Strangers!’ repeated the old man in a whisper. 

‘Ah! Ad rub uds too,’ added Barney. ‘Frob the cuttry, but 
subthig in your way, or Fb bistaked.’ 

Fagin appeared to receive this communication with great 
interest. Mounting a stool, he cautiously applied his eyes to the 
pane of glass, from which secret post he could see Mr Claypole 
taking cold beef from the dish, and porter from the pot, and ad- 
ministering homoeopathic doses of both to Charlotte, who sat 
patiently by, eating and drinking at his pleasure. 

‘Aha!’ he whispered, looking round to Barney, ‘I like that 
fellow’s looks. He’d be of use to us; he knows how to train the girl 
already. Don’t make as much noise as a mouse, my dear, and let 
me hear ’em talk - let me hear ’em.’ 

He again applied his eye to the glass, and turning his ear to the 
partition, listened attentively: with a subtle and eager look upon 
his face, that might have appertained to some old goblin. 

‘So I mean to be a gentleman,’ said Mr Claypole, kicking out his 
legs, and continuing a conversation, the commencement of which 
Fagin had arrived too late to hear. ‘No more jolly old coffins, 
Charlotte, but a gentleman’s life for me: and, if yer like yer shall 
be a lady.’ 


380 



Nasir TWIST 


‘I should like that well enough, dear/ replied Charlotte; ‘but 
tills ain’t to be emptied every day, and people to get clear off after 

7t.’ 

'Tills be blowed!’ said Mr Claypole; ‘there’s more things 
besides tills to be emptied.’ 

'What do you mean?’ asked his companion. 

'Pockets, women’s ridicules,^ houses, mail-coaches, banks!’ said 
Mr Claypole, rising with the porter. 

'But you can’t do all that, dear,’ said Charlotte. 

'I shall look out to get into company with them as can,’ replied 
Noah. ‘They’ll be able to make us useful some way or another. 
Why, you yourself are worth fifty women; I never see such a 
precious sly and deceitful creetur as yer can be when I let yen’ 

'Lor, how nice it is to hear you say sol’ exclaimed Charlotte, 
imprinting a kiss upon his ugly face. 

‘There, that’ll do: don’t yer be too affectionate, in case I’m cross 
with yer,’ said Noah, disengaging himself with great gravity. ‘I 
should like to be the captain of some band, and have the whopping 
of ’em, and follering ’em about, unbeknown to themselves. That 
would suit me, if there was good profit; and if we could only get 
in with some gentlemen of this sort, I say it would be cheap at 
that twenty-pound note you’ve got, - especially as we don’t very 
well know how to get rid of it ourselves.’ 

After expressing this opinion, Mr Claypole looked into the 
porter-pot with an aspect of deep wisdom; and having well shaken 
its contents, nodded condescendingly to Charlotte, and took a 
draught, wherewith he appeared greatly refreshed. He was medi- 
tating another, when the sudden opening of the door, and the 
appearance of a stranger, interrupted him. 

The stranger was Mr Fagin. And very amiable he looked, and a 
very low bow he made, as he advanced, and setting himself down 
at the nearest table, ordered something to drink of the grinning 
Barney. 

" 'A pleasant night, sir, but cool for the time of year,’ said Fagin 
rubbing his hands. ‘From the country, I see, sir?’ 

‘How do yer see that?’ asked Noah Claypole. 

‘We have not so much dust as that in London,’ replied Fagin, 
pointing from Noah’s shoes to those of his companion, and from 
them to the two bundles. 


381 



Nasir TWIST 


‘Yer a sharp feller/ said Noah. ‘Ha! ha! only hear that, 
Charlotte! * 

‘Why, one need be sharp in this town, my dear,’ replied the Jew, 
sinking his voice to a confidential whisper; ‘and that’s the truth,’ 

Fagin followed up this remark by striking the side of his nose 
with his right forefinger, - a gesture which Noah attempted to 
imitate, though not with complete success, in consequence of his 
own nose not being large enough for the purpose. However, Mr 
Fagin seemed to interpret the endeavour as expressing a perfect 
coincidence with his opinion, and put about the liquor which 
Barney re-appeared with, in a very friendly manner. 

‘ Good stuff that,’ observed Mr Claypole, smacking his lips. 

‘Dear!’ said Fagin. ‘A man need be always emptying a till, or a 
pocket, or a woman’s reticule, or a house, or a mail-coach, or a 
bank, if he drinks it regularly.’ 

Mr Claypole no sooner heard this extract from his own remarks 
than he fell back in his chair, and looked from the Jew to Charlotte 
with a countenance of ashy paleness and excessive terror. 

‘Don’t mind me, my dear,’ said Fagin, drawing his chair closer. 
‘Ha! ha! it was lucky it was only me that heard you by chance. 
It was very lucky it was only me.’ 

‘I didn’t take it,’ stammered Noah, no longer stretching out his 
legs like an independent gentleman, but coiling them up as well as 
he could under his chair; ‘it was all her doing: yer’ve got it now, 
Charlotte, yer know yer have.’ 

‘No matter who’s got it, or who did it, my dear!’ replied Fagin, 
glancing, nevertheless, wdth a hawk’s eye at the girl and the two 
bundles. ‘I’m in that way myself, and I like you for it.’ 

‘In what way.^’ asked Mr Claypole, a little recovering, 

‘In that way of business,’ rejoined Fagin; ‘and so are the people 
of the house. You’ve hit the right nail upon the head, and are as 
safe here as you could be. There is not a safer place in all this town 
dian is the Cripples; that is, when I like to make it so. And I have 
taken a fancy to you and the young woman; so I’ve said the word, 
and you may make your minds easy.’ 

Noah Claypole’s mind might have been at ease after this assur 
ance, but his body certainly was not; for he shuffled and writhec 
about, into various uncouth positions: eyeing his new friend mean 
while with mingled fear and suspicion. 

382 




The Jew and Morris both begin to understand Each Other 


Nasir TWIST 


‘Til tell you more/ said Fagin, after he had reassured the girl, 
by dint of friendly nods and muttered encouragements. ‘I have got 
a friend that I think can gratify your darling wish, and put you in 
the right way, where you can take whatever department of the 
business you think will suit you best at first, and be taught all the 
others.’ 

‘ Yer speak as if yer were in earnest,’ replied Noah. 

'What advantage would it be to me to be anything elsc.^*’ in- 
quired Fagin, shrugging his shoulders. ‘Herel Let me have a word 
with you outside.’ 

‘There’s no occasion to trouble ourselves to move,’ said Noah, 
getting his legs by gradual degrees abroad again. ‘She’ll take the 
luggage upstairs the while. Charlotte, see to them bundles! * 

This mandate, which had been delivered with great majesty, was 
obeyed without the slightest demur; and Charlotte made the best 
of her way off with the packages while Noah held the door open 
and watched her out. 

‘She’s kept tolerably well under, ain’t she.^’ he asked as he 
resumed his seat: in the tone of a keeper who has tamed some wild 
animal. 

‘Quite perfect,’ rejoined Fagm, clapping him on the shoulder. 
‘You’re a genius, my dear.’ 

‘Why, I suppose if I wasn’t, I shouldn’t be here,’ replied Noah. 
‘But, I say, she’ll be back if yer lose time.’ 

‘Now, what do you think?’ said Fagin. ‘If you was to like my 
friend, could you do better than join him?’ 

‘Is he in a good way of business? that’s where it is!’ responded 
Noah, winking one of his little eyes. 

‘The top of the tree; employs a power of hands; has the very 
best society in the profession.’ 

‘Regular town-maders?’ asked Mr Claypole. 

‘ Not a countryman among ’em; and I don’t think he’d take you, 
even on my recommendation, if he didn’t run rather short of 
assistants just now,’ replied Fagin. 

‘Should I have to hand over?’ said Noah, slapping his breeches- 
pocket. 

Tt couldn’t possibly be done without,’ replied Fagin, in a most 
decided manner. 

‘Twenty pound, though, - it’s a lot of money!’ 

384 



Nasir TWIST 


‘Not when it*s in a note you can’t get rid of/ retorted Fagin. 
‘Number and date taken, I suppose? Payment stopped at the 
TBank? Ah! It’s not worth much to him. It’ll have to go abroad, and 
he couldn’t sell it for a great deal in the market.’ 

‘When could I see him?’ asked Noah doubtfully. 

‘Tomorrow morning.’ 

‘Where?’ 

‘Here.’ 

‘Uml’ said Noah. ‘What’s the wages?’ 

‘Live like a gentleman - board and lodging, pipes and spirits 
free - half of all you earn, and half of all the young woman earns,’ 
replied Mr Fagin. 

Whether Noah Claypole, whose rapacity was none of the least 
comprehensive, would have acceded even to these glowing terms, 
had he been a perfectly free agent, is very doubtful; but as he recol- 
lected that, in the event of his refusal it was in the power of his new 
acquaintance to give him up to justice immediately (and more un- 
^ likely things had come to pass), he gradually relented, and said he 
thought that would suit him. 

‘But, yer see,’ observed Noah, ‘as she will be able to do a good 
deal, I should like to take something very light.’ 

‘A little fancy work?’ suggested Fagin. 

‘Ah! something of that sort,’ replied Noah. ‘What do you think 
would suit me now? Something not too trying for the strength, and 
not very dangerous, you know. That’s the sort of thing!’ 

‘I heard you talk of something in the spy way upon the others, 
my dear,’ said Fagin. ‘My friend wants somebody who would do 
that well, very much.’ 

‘Why, I did mention that, and I shouldn’t mind turning my 
hand to it sometimes,’ rejoined Mr Claypole slowly; ‘but it 
wouldn’t pay by itself, you know.’ 

‘That’s true!’ observed the Jew, ruminating or pretending to 
ruminate. ‘No, it might not.’ 

.. ‘What do you think, then?’ asked Noah, anxiously regarding 
him. ‘Something in the sneaking way, where it was pretty sure 
work, and not much more risk than being at home.’ 

‘What do you think of the old ladies?’ asked Fagin. ‘There’s a 
good deal of money made in snatching their bags and parcels, and 
running round the corner.’ 


385 



Nasir TWIST 


‘Don’t they holler out a good deal, and scratch sometimes?’ 
asked Noah, shaking his head. ‘I don’t think that would answer 
my purpose. Ain’t there any other line open?’ 

‘Stop!’ said Fagin, laying his hand on Noah’s knee. ‘The 
kinchin lay.’ 

‘What’s that?’ demanded Mr Claypole. 

‘ The kinchins, my dear,’ said Fagin, ‘ is the young children that’s 
sent on errands by their mothers, with sixpences and shillings; and 
the lay is just to take their money away - they’ve always got it 
ready in their hands, - then knock ’em into the kennel, and walk off 
veiy slow, as if there were nothing else the matter but a child fallen 
down and hurt itself. Ha! ha! ha!’ 

‘Ha! ha!’ roared Mr Claypole, kicking up his legs in an ecstasy, 
‘Lord, that’s the very thing!’ 

‘To be sure it is,’ replied Fagin; ‘and you can have a few good 
beats chalked out in Camden Town, and Battle Bridge, and neigh- 
bourhoods like that, where they’re always going errands; and you 
can upset as many kinchins as you want, any hour in the day. , 
Ha! ha! ha!’ 

With this, Fagin poked Mr Claypole in the side, and they 
joined in a burst of laughter both long and loud. 

‘Well, that’s all right!’ said No|ih, when he had recovered 
himself, and Charlotte had returned. ‘What time tomorrow shall 
we say?’ 

‘Will ten do?’ asked Fagin, adding, as Mr Claypole nodded 
assent, ‘What name shall I tell my good friend?’ 

‘Mr Bolter,’ replied Noah, who had prepared himself for such an 
emergency. ‘Mr Morris Bolter. This is Mrs Bolter.’ 

‘Mrs Bolter’s humble servant,’ said Fagin, bowing with gro- 
tesque politeness. ‘I hope I shall know her better very shortly.’ 

‘Do you hear the gentleman, Charlotte?’ thundered Mr 
Claypole. 

‘Yes, Noah, dear!’ replied Mrs Bolter, extending her hand. 

‘She calls me Noah, as a sort of fond way of talking,’ said Mr 
Morris Bolter, late Claypole, turning to Fagin. ‘You understand?’ 

‘Oh yes, I understand - perfectly,’ replied Fagin, telling the 
truth for once. ‘Good night! Good night!’ 

With many adieus and good wishes, Mr Fagin went his way. 
Noah Claypole, bespeaking his good lady’s attention, proceeded 

386 



Nasir TWIST 


to enlighten her relative to the arrangement he had made, with all 
that haughtiness and air of superiority, becoming, not only a 
member of the sterner sex, but a gentleman who appreciated the 
dignity of a special appointment on the kinchin lay, in London 
and its vicinity. 


CHAPTER 43 

Wherein is shown how the Artful Dodger got into Trouble 


‘And so it was you that was your own friend, was it?’ asked Mr 
Claypole, otherwise Bolter, when, by virtue of the compact 
entered into between them, he had removed next day to Fagin’s 
-house. ‘ ’Cod, I thought as much last night 1’ 

‘Every man’s his own friend, my dear,’ replied Fagin, with his 
most insinuating grin. ‘He hasn’t as good a one as himself 
an3rwhere.’ 

‘Except sometimes,’ replied Morris Bolter, assuming the air of 
a man of the world. ‘ Some people are nobody’s enemies but their 
own, yer know.’ 

‘Don’t believe that,’ said Fagin. ‘When a man’s his own enemy, 
it’s only because he’s too much his own friend; not because he’s 
careful for everybody but himself. Pooh! pooh! There ain’t such a 
thing in nature.’ 

‘There oughtn’t to be, if there is,’ replied Mr Bolter. 

‘That stands to reason. Some conjurers say that number three is 
the magic number, and some say number seven. It’s neither, my 
friend, neither. It’s number one.’ 

‘Ha! ha!’ cried Mr Bolter. ‘Number one for ever.’ 

‘In a little community like ours, my dear,’ said Fagin, who felt it 
necessary to qualify this position, ‘we have a general number 
one; that is, you can’t consider yourself as number one, with- 
out considering me too as the same, and all the other young 
people.* 

‘Oh, the devil!’ exclaimed Mr Bolter. 

387 



Nasir TWIST 


‘You see/ pursued Fagin, affecting to disregard this interrup- 
tion, ‘we are so mixed up together, and identified in our interests, 
that it must be so. For instance, it’s your object to take care of 
number one ~ meaning yourself.’ 

‘Certainly,’ replied Mr Bolter. ‘Yer about right there.’ 

‘Well! You can’t take care of yourself, number one, without 
taking care of me, number one.’ 

‘Number two, you mean,’ said Mr Bolter, who was largely 
endowed with the quality of selfishness. 

‘No, I don’t!’ retorted Fagin. ‘I’m of the same importance to 
you, as you are to yourself.’ 

‘I say,’ interrupted Mr Bolter, ‘yer a very nice man, and I’m 
very fond of yer; but we ain’t quite so thick together, as all that 
comes to.’ 

‘Only think,’ said Fagin, shrugging his shoulders, and stretch- 
ing out his hands; ‘only consider. You’ve done what’s a very 
pretty thing, and what I love you for doing; but what at the same 
time would put the cravat round your throat, that’s so very easily 
tied and so very difficult to unloose - in plain English, the halter!’ 

Mr Bolter put his hand to his neckerchief, as if he felt it in- 
conveniently tight; and murmured an assent, qualified in tone but 
not in substance. 

‘The gallows,’ continued Fagin, ‘the gallows, my dear, is an 
ugly finger-post, which points out a very short and sharp turning 
that has stopped many a bold fellow’s career on the broad high- 
way. To keep in the easy road, and keep it at a distance, is object 
number one with you.’ 

‘Of course it is,’ replied Mr Bolter. ‘What do yer talk about 
such things for.^’ 

‘Only to show you my meaning clearly,’ said the Jew, raising 
his eyebrows. ‘To be able to do that, you depend upon me. To 
keep my little business all snug, I depend upon you. The first is 
your number one, the second my number one. The more you value 
your number one, the more careful you must be of mine; so we 
come at last to what I told you at first ~ that a regard for number 
one holds us all together, and must do so, unless we would all go 
to pieces in company.’ 

‘That’s true,’ rejoined Mr Bolter, thoughtfully. ‘Oh! yer a 
^ cunning old codger!’ 


388 



Nasir TWIST 

Mr Fagin saw, with delight, that this tribute to his powers was 
no mere compliment, but that he had really impressed his recruit 
with a sense of his wily genius, which it was most important that 
he should entertain in the outset of their acquaintance. To 
strengthen an impression so desirable and useful, he followed up 
the blow by acquainting him, in some detail, with the magnitude 
and extent of his operations; blending truth and fiction together, as 
best served his purpose; and bringing both to bear, with so much 
art, that Mr Bolter’s respect visibly increased, and became tem- 
pered, at the same time, with a degree of wholesome fear, which it 
was highly desirable to awaken. 

Tt’s this mutual trust we have in each other that consoles me 
under heavy losses,’ said Fagin. 'My best hand was taken from me, 
yesterday morning.’ 

'You don’t mean to say he died.^’ cried Mr Bolter. 

‘No, no,’ replied Fagin, ‘not so bad as that. Not quite so bad.’ 

‘What, I suppose he was -’ 

‘Wanted,’ interposed Fagin. ‘Yes, he was wanted.’ 

‘Very particular.^’ inquired Mr Bolter. 

‘No,’ replied Fagin, ‘not very. He was charged with attempting 
to pick a pocket, and they found a silver snuff-box on him, - his 
own, my dear, his own, for he took snuff himself, and was very fond 
of it. They remanded him till today, for they thought they knew 
the owner. Ah! he was worth fifty boxes, and I’d give the price of 
as many to have him back. You should have known the Dodger, 
my dear; you should have known the Dodger.’ 

‘Well, but I shall know him, I hope; don’t yer think so,^’ said 
Mr Bolter. 

‘I’m doubtful about it,’ replied Fagin, with a sigh. ‘If they don’t 
get any fresh evidence, it’ll only be a summary conviction, and we 
shall have him back again after six weeks or so; but, if they do, it’s 
a case of lagging. They know what a clever lad he is; he’ll be a lifer. 
They’ll make the Artfiil nothing less than a lifer.’ 

‘What do yer mean by lagging and a lifer .^’ demanded Mr 
Bolter. ‘What’s the good of talking in that way to me; why don’t 
yer speak so as I can understand yer.^’ 

Fagin was about to translate these mysterious expressions into 
the vulgar tongue; and, being interpreted, Mr Bolter would have 
been informed that they represented that combination of words, 

389 



Nasir TWIST 


"transportation for life’, when the dialogue was cut short by the 
entry of Master Bates, with his hands in his breeches-pockets, and 
his face twisted into a look of semi-comical woe. 

"It’s all up, Fagin,’ said Charley, when he and his new com- 
panion had been made known to each other. 

"What do you mean?’ 

"They’ve found the gentleman as owns the box; two or three 
moie’s a coming to ’dentify him; and the Artful’s booked for a 
passage out,’ replied Master Bates. ‘I must have a full suit of 
mourning, Fagin, and a hatband, to wish him in, afore he sets out 
upon his travels. To think of Jack Dawkins - lummy Jack - the 
Dodger - the Artful Dodger - going abroad for a common two- 
penny-halfpenny sneeze-boxl I never thought he’d a done it under 
a gold watch, chain, and seals, at the lowest. Oh, why didn’t he rob 
some rich old gentleman of all his walables, and go out as a gentle- 
man, and not like a common prig, without no honour nor glory!’ 

With this expression of feeling for his unfortunate friend, Master 
Bates sat himself on the nearest chair with an aspect of chagrin and 
despondency. 

"What do you talk about his having neither honour nor glory 
for.^’ exclaimed Fagin, darting an angry look at his pupil. ‘Wasn’t 
he always top-sawyer among you all! Is there one of you that 
could touch him or come near him on any scent! Eh?’ 

"Not one,’ replied Master Bates, in a voice rendered husky by 
regret; ‘not one.’ 

"Then what do you talk of?’ leplied Fagin angrily; "what are 
you blubbering for?’ 

" ’Cause it isn’t on the rec-ord, is it?’ said Charley, chafed into 
perfect defiance of his venerable friend by the current of his regrets; 
* ’cause it can’t come out in the ’dictment; ’cause nobody will 
never know half of what he was. How will he stand in the Newgate 
Calendar P’raps not be there at all. Oh, my eye, my eye,- wot a 
blow it is! ’ 

"Ha! ha!’ cried Fagin, extending his right hand, and turning to 
Mr Bolter in a fit of chuckling which shook him as though he had 
the palsy; ‘ see what a pride they take in their profession, my dear. 
Ain’t it beautiful?’ 

Mr Bolter nodded assent; and Fagin, after contemplating the 
grief of Charley Bates for some seconds with evident satisfaction, 

390 



Nasir TWIST 


Stepped up to that young gentleman and patted him on the 
shoulder. 

‘Never mind, Charley,* said Fagin soothingly ; ‘it’ll come out, 
It’ll be sure to come out. They’ll all know what a clever fello-w he 
was; he’ll show it himself, and not disgrace his old pals and 
teachers. Think how young he is, too! What a distinction, Charley, 
to be lagged at his time of life!’ 

‘Well, it is a honour, that isi* said Charley, a little consoled. 

‘He shall have all he wants,’ continued the Jew. ‘He shall be 
kept in tlie Stone Jug, Charley, like a gentleman. Like a gentle- 
man! With his beer every day, and money in his pocket to pitch 
and toss with, if he can’t spend it.’ 

‘No, shall he though.^’ cried Charley Bates. 

‘Ay, that he shall,’ replied Fagin, ‘and we’ll have a big- wig, 
Charley: one that’s got the greatest gift of the gab: to carry on his 
defence; and he shall make a speech for himself too, if he likes; 
and we’ll read it all in the papers - “Artful Dodger - shrieks of 
laughter - here the court was convulsed” - eh, Charley, eh.^’ 

‘Ha! ha!’ laughed Master Bates, ‘what a lark that would be, 
wouldn’t it, Fagin I say, how the Artful would bother ’em, 
wouldn’t he.^’ 

‘Would!’ cried Fagin. ‘He shall - he will!’ 

‘Ah, to be sure, so he will,’ repeated Charley, rubbing his hands. 

‘I think I see him now,’ cried the Jew, bending his eyes upon his 
pupil. 

‘So do I,’ cried Charley Bates. ‘Ha! ha! ha! so do 1. 1 see it all 
afore me, upon my soul I do, Fagin. What a game! What a regular 
game! All the big-wigs trying to look solemn, and Jack Dawkins 
addressing of ’em as intimate and comfortable as if he was the 
judge’s own son making a speech arter dinner - ha! ha! ha! ’ 

In fact, Mr Fagin had so well humoured his young friend’s 
eccentric disposition, that Master Bates, who had at first been 
disposed to consider the imprisoned Dodger rather in the light 
of a victim, now looked upon him as the chief actor in a scene of 
most uncommon and exquisite humour, and felt quite impatient 
for the arrival of the time when his old companion should have so 
favourable an opportunity of displaying his abilities. 

‘We must Imow how he gets on today, by some handy means or 
otlier,’ said Fagin. ‘Let me think.’ 

391 



Nasir TWIST 


‘Shall I go?’ asked Charley. 

‘Not for the world,’ replied Fagin. ‘Are you mad, my dear, 
stark mad, that you’d walk into the very place where - No, 
Charley, no. One is enough to lose at a time.’ 

‘You don’t mean to go yourself, I suppose?’ said Charley with 
a humorous leer. 

‘That wouldn’t quite fit,’ replied Fagin, shaking his head. 

‘Then why don’t you send this new cove?’ asked Master Bates, 
laying his hand on Noah’s arm. ‘Nobody knows him.’ 

‘Why, if he didn’t mind-’ observed Fagin. 

‘Mind!’ interposed Charle}^ ‘What should he have to mind?’ 

‘Really nothing, my dear,’ said Fagin, turning to Mr Bolter, 
‘really nothing.’ 

‘Oh, I dare say about that, yer know,’ observed Noah, backing 
towards the door, and shaking his head with a kind of sober alarm. 
‘No, no - none of that. It’s not in my department, that ain’t.’ 

‘Wot department has he got, Fagin?’ inquired Master Bates, 
surveying Noah’s lank form with much disgust. ‘The cutting away 
when there’s anything wrong, and the eating all the wittles when 
there’s everything right; is that his branch?’ 

‘Never mind,’ retorted Mr Bolter; ‘and don’t yer take liberties 
with yer superiors, little boy, or yer’ll find yerself in the wrong 
shop.’ 

Master Bates laughed so vehemently at this magnificent threat, 
that it was some time before Fagin could interpose, and represent 
to Mr Bolter that he incurred no possible danger in visiting the 
police-office; that, inasmuch as no account of the little affair in 
which he had been engaged, nor any description of his person, 
had yet been forwarded to the metropolis, it was very probable 
that he was not even suspected of having resorted to it for shelter; 
and that, if he were properly disguised, it would be as safe a spot 
for him to visit as any in London, inasmuch as it would be, of all 
places, the very last, to which he could be supposed likely to 
resort of his own free will. 

Persuaded, in part, by these representations, but overborne in 
a much greater degree by his fear of Fagin, Mr Bolter at length 
consented, with a very bad grace, to undertake the expedition. By 
Fagin’s directions, he immediately substituted for his own attire, 
a waggoner’s frock, velveteen breeches, and leather leggings: all 

392 



Nasir TWIST 

of which articles the Jew had at hand. He was likewise furnished 
with a felt hat well garnished witli turnpike tickets; and a carter’s 
whip. Thus equipped, he was to saunter into the office, as some 
country fellow from Covent Garden market might be supposed to 
do for the gratification of his cunosity, and as he was as awkward, 
ungainly, and raw-boned a fellow as need be, Mr Fagin had no 
fear but that he would look the part to perfection. 

These arrangements completed, he was informed of the neces- 
sary signs and tokens by which to recognize the Artful Dodger, 
and was conveyed by Master Bates through dark and winding ways 
to within a very short distance of Bow Street Having described 
the precise situation of the office, and accompanied it with copious 
directions how he was to walk straight up fhe passage, and when 
he got into the yard take the door up the steps on the right-hand 
side, and pull off his hat as he went into the room, Charley Bates 
bade him hurry on alone, and promised to bide his return on the 
spot of their parting. 

Noah Claypole, or Morris Bolter as the reader pleases, punctually 
followed the directions he had received, whidi - Master Bates 
being pretty well acquainted with the locality - were so exact that 
he was enabled to gain the magisterial presence without asking any 
question, or meeting with any interruption by the way. He found 
himself jostled among a crowd of people, chiefly women, who were 
huddled together in a dirty frowsy room, at the upper end of 
which was a raised platform railed off from the rest, with a dock for 
the pnsoners on the left hand against the wall, a box for the wit- 
nesses in the middle, and a desk for the magistrates on the right; 
the awful locality last named, being screened off by a partition 
which concealed the bench from the common gaze, and left the 
vulgar to imagine (if they could) the full majesty of justice. 

There were only a couple of women in the dock, who were 
nodding to their admiring friends, while the clerk read some 
depositions to a couple of policemen and a man in plain clothes 
who leant over the table. A jailer stood reclining against the dock- 
rail, tapping his nose listlessly with a large key, except when he re- 
pressed an undue tendency to conversation among the idlers, by 
proclaiming silence; or looked sternly up to bid some woman 
‘Take that baby out’, when the gravity of justice was disturbed by 
feeble cries, half-smothered in the mother’s shawl, from some 

393 



Nasir TWIST 


meagre infant. The room smelt close and unwholesome; the walls 
were dirt-discoloured; and the ceiling blackened. There was an old 
smoky bust over the mantel-shelf, and a dusty clock above the 
dock - the only thing present, that seemed to go on as it ought; 
for depravity, or poverty, or an habitual acquaintance with both, 
had left a taint on all the animate matter, hardly less unpleasant than 
the thick greasy scum on every inanimate object that frowned 
upon it. 

Noah looked eagerly about him for the Dodger; but although 
there were several women who would have done very well for 
that distinguished character’s mother or sister, and more than one 
man who might be supposed to bear a strong resemblance to his 
father, nobody at all answering the description given him of Mr 
’Dawkins was to be seen. He waited in a state of much suspense and 
uncertainty until the women, being committed for trial, went 
flaunting out; and then was quickly relieved by the appearance of 
another prisoner who he felt at once could be no other than the 
object of his visit. 

It was indeed Mr Dawkins, who, shuffling into the office with 
the big coat-sleeves tucked up as usual, his left hand in his pocket, 
and his hat in his right hand, preceded the jailer, with a rolling gait 
altogether indescribable, and, taking his place in the dock, re- 
quested in an audible voice to know what he was placed in that 
’ere disgraceful sitivation for. 

‘Hold your tongue, will you?’ said the jailer- 

T’m an Englishman, ain’t I?’ rejoined the Dodger. ‘Where are 
my priwileges?’ 

‘You’ll get your privileges soon enough,’ retorted the jailer, 
‘and pepper with ’em.’ 

‘We’ll see wot the Secretary of State for the Home Affairs has 
got to say to the beaks, if I don’t,’ leplied Mr Dawkins. ‘Now then! 
Wot is this here business? I shall thank the madg’strates to dispose 
of this here little affair, and not to keep me while they read the 
paper, for I’ve got an appointment with a genelman in the city, 
and as I’m a man of my word, and wery punctual in business matters, 
he’ll go away if I ain’t there to my time, and then pr’aps there won’t 
be an action for damage against them as kep me away. Oh no, 
certainly not!’ 

At this point, the Dodger, with a show of being very particular 

394 



Nasir TWIST 


with a view to proceedings to be had thereafter, desired the jailer 
to communicate ‘the names of them two old files as was on the 
bench’. Which so tickled the spectators, that they laughed almost 
as heartily as Master Bates could have done if he had heard the 
request. 

‘Silence there!’ cried the jailer. 

‘What IS this.^’ inquired one of the magistrates. 

‘A pick-pocketing case, your worship.’ 

‘Has the boy ever been heie before?’ 

‘ He ought to have been, a many times,’ replied the jailer. ‘He has 
been pretty well everywhere else. I know him well, your 
worship.’ 

‘Oh! you know me, do you?’ cried the Artful, making a note of 
the statement. ‘Wery good. That’s a case of deformation of 
character, anyway.’ 

Here there was another laugh, and another cry of silence. 

‘Now then, where are the witnesses?’ said the clerk. 

‘Ah! that’s right,’ added the Dodger. ‘ WTaere are they? I should 
like to see ’em.’ 

This wish was immediately gratified, for a policeman stepped 
forward who had seen the prisoner attempt the pocket of an un- 
known gentleman in a crowd, and indeed take a handkerchief 
therefrom, which, being a very old one, he deliberately put back 
again, after trying it on his own countenance. For this reason, he 
took the Dodger into custody as soon as he could get near him, and 
the said Dodger, being searched, had upon his person a silver snuff- 
box, with the owner’s name engraved upon the lid. This gentle- 
man had been discovered on reference to the Court Guide, and 
being then and there present, swore that the snuff-box was his, and 
that he had missed it on the previous day, the moment he had dis- 
engaged himself from the crowd before referred to. He had also 
remarked a young gentleman in the jhtong, particularly active in 
making his way about, and that young gentleman was the prisoner 
before him. 

‘Have you anything to ask this witness, boy?’ said the 
magistrate. 

‘I wouldn’t abase myself by descending to hold no conversa- 
tion with him,’ replied the Dodger. 

‘Have you anything to say at all?’ 

395 



Nasir TWIST 


‘Do you hear his worship ask if you’ve anything to say?’ 
inquired the jailer, nudging the silent Dodger with his elbow. 

‘I beg your pardon,’ said the Dodger, looking up with an air of 
abstraction. ‘Did you redress yourself to me, my man?’ 

‘I never see such an out-and-out young wagabond, your 
worship,’ observed the officer with a grin. ‘Do you mean to say 
anything, you young shaver? ’ 

‘No,’ leplied the Dodger, ‘not here, for this ain’t the shop for 
justice; besides which, my attorney is a-breakfasting this morning 
with the Wice President of the House of Commons; but I shall 
have something to say elsewhere, and so will he, and so will a wery 
numerous and ’spectable circle of acquaintance as’ll make them 
beaks wish they’d never been born, or that they’d got their foot- 
men to hang ’em up to their own hatpegs, ’afore they let ’em come 
out this morning to try it on upon me. I’ll -’ 

‘ There 1 He’s fully committed!’ interposed the clerk. ‘Take him 
away.’ 

‘Come on,’ said the jailer. 

‘Oh ah! I’ll come on,’ replied the Dodger, brushing his hat with 
the palm of his hand. ‘Ah! (to the Bench) it’s no use your looking 
frightened; I won’t show you no mercy, not a ha’porth of it. 
YoilU pay for this, my fine fellers. I wouldn’t be you for some- 
thing! I wouldn’t go free, now, if you was to fall down on your 
knees and ask me. Here, carry me off to prison! Take me away!’ 

With these last words, the Dodger suffered himself to be led off 
by the collar; threatening, till he got into the yard, to make a 
parliamentary business of it; and then grinning in the officer’s 
face, with great glee and self-approval. 

Having seen him locked up by himself in a little cell, Noah 
made the best of his way back to where he had left Master Bates. 
After waiting here some time, he was joined by that young gentle- 
man, who had prudently abstained from showing himself until he 
had looked carefully abroad from a snug retreat, and ascertained that 
his new friend had not been followed by any impertinent person. 

The two hastened back together, to bear to Mr Fagin the ani- 
mating news that the Dodger was doing full justice to his bringing- 
up, and establishing for himself a glorious reputation. 



CHAPTER 44 


The Time arrives for Nancy to redeem her Pledge to Rose Maylie. 
She fails 


Adept as she was in all the arts of cunning and dissimulation, the 
girl Nancy could not wholly conceal the effect whicEthe knowledge 
of the step she had taken wrought upon her mind. She remem- 
bered that both the crafty Jew and the brutal Sikes had confided 
to her schemes, which had been hidden from all others^ in the full 
confidence that she was trustworthy and beyond the reach of their 
suspicion. Vile as those schemes were, desperate as were their 
originators, and bitter as were her feelings towards Fagin, who had 
led her, step by step, deeper and deeper down into an abyss of 
crime and misery, whence was no escape; still, there were times 
when, even towards him, she felt some relenting, lest her disclosure 
should bring him within the iron grasp he had so long eluded, 
and he should fall at last - richly as he merited such a fate - by her 
hand. 

But, these were the mere wanderings of a mind unable wholly 
to detach itself from old companions and associations, though 
enabled to fix itself steadily on one object, and resolved not to be 
turned aside by any consideration. Her fears for Sikes would have 
been more powerful inducements to recoil while there was yet 
time; but she had stipulated that her secret should be rigidly kept, 
she had dropped no clue which could lead to his discovery, she 
had refused, even for his sake, a refuge from all the guilt and 
wretchedness that encompassed her - and what more could she do! 
She was resolved. 

Though all her mental struggles terminated in this conclusion, 
they forced themselves upon her, again and again, and left their 
traces too. She grew pale and thin, even within a few days. At 
times, she took no heed of what was passing before her, or no part 
in conversations where once, she would have been the loudest. 
At other times, she laughed without merriment, and was noisy 
without cause or meaning. At others - often within a moment 
afterwards - she sat silent and dejected, brooding with her head 

397 



Nasir TWIST 


upon her hands, while the very effort by which she roused herself, 
told, more forcibly than even these indications, that she was ill at 
ease, and that her thoughts were occupied with matters very 
different and distant from those in course of discussion by her 
companions. 

It was Sunday night, and the bell of the nearest church struck 
the hour. Sikes and the Jew were talking, but they paused to listen. 
The girl looked up from the low seat on which she crouched, and 
listened too. Eleven. 

‘An hour this side of midnight,’ said Sikes, raising the blind to 
look out and returning to his seat. ‘Dark and heavy it is too. A 
good night for business this.’ 

‘Ah!’ replied Fagin. ‘What a pity. Bill, my dear, that there’s 
none quite ready to be done.’ 

‘You’re right for once,’ replied Sikes gruffly. ‘It is a pity, for 
I’m in the humour too.’ 

Fagin sighed, and shook his head despondingly. 

‘We must make up for lost time when we’ve got things into a 
good train. That’s all I know,’ said Sikes. 

‘That’s the way to talk, my dear,’ replied Fagin, venturing to 
pat him on the shoulder. ‘It does me good to hear you.’ 

‘Does you good does itl’ cried Sikes, ‘Well, so be it.’ 

‘Ha! ha! ha!’ laughed Fagin, as if he were relieved by even this 
concession. ‘You’re like yourself tonight. Bill! Quite like yourself.’ 

‘ I don’t feel like myself when you lay that withered old claw on 
my shoulder, so take it away,’ said Sikes casting off the Jew’s hand. 

‘It makes you nervous, Bill - reminds you of being nabbed, 
does it?’ said Fagin, determined not to be offended, 

‘ Reminds me of being nabbed by the devil,’ returned Sikes. 
‘There never was another man with such a face as yours, unless it 
was your father, and I suppose he is singeing his grizzled red beard 
by this time, unless you came straight from the old ’un without 
any father at all betwixt you; which I shouldn’t wonder at, a bit.’ 

Fagin offered no reply to this compliment; but, pulling Sikes by 
the sleeve, pointed his finger towards Nancy, who had taken 
advantage of the foregoing conversation to put on her bonnet, and 
was now leaving the room. 

‘Hallo!’ cried Sikes, ‘Nance. Where’s the gal going to at this 
time of night?’ 

398 



Nasir TWIST 


‘Not far.’ 

*What answer’s that?’ returned Sikes. ‘Where are you going?’ 

‘I say, not far.’ 

‘And I say where?’ retorted Sikes. ‘Do you hear me?’ 

‘I don’t know where,’ replied the girl. 

‘Then I do,’ said Sikes, more in the spirit of obstinacy than 
because he had any real objection to the girl going where she 
listed. ‘ Nowhere. Sit down.’ 

‘I’m not well. I told you that before,’ rejoined the girl. ‘I want a 
breath of air.’ 

‘ Put your head out of the winder,’ replied Sikes. 

‘There’s not enough there,’ said the girl. ‘I want it in the street.’ 

‘Then you won’t have it,’ replied Sikes. With which assurance 
he rose, locked the door, took the key out, and pulling her bonnet 
from her head, flung it up to the top of an old press. ‘There,’ said 
the robber. ‘Now stop quietly where you are, will you?’ 

‘It’s not such a matter as a bonnet would keep me,’ said the girl 
turning very pale. ‘What do you mean. Bill? Do you know what 
you’re doing?’ 

‘Know what I’m - Oh! ’ cried Sikes turning to Fagin, ‘she’s out 
of her senses, you know, or she daren’t talk to me in that way.’ 

‘You’ll drive me on to something desperate,’ muttered the girl, 
placing both hands upon her breast, as though to keep down by 
force some violent outbreak. ‘ Let me go, will you, - this minute - 
this instant.’ 

‘Nol’ said Sikes. 

‘Tell him to let me go, Fagin. He had better. It’ll be better for 
him. Do you hear me?’ cried Nancy stamping her foot upon the 
ground. 

‘Hear you! ’ repeated Sikes turning round in his chair to confront 
her. ‘Aye! And if I hear you for half a minute longer, the dog shall 
have such a grip on your throat as’ll tear some of that screaming 
voice out. Wot has come over you, you jade! Wot is it?’ 

‘Let me go,’ said the girl with great earnestness; then sitting 
herself down on the floor, before the door, she said, ‘Bill, let me 
go; you don’t know what you are doing. You don’t, indeed. For 
only one hour - do - do!’ 

‘ Cut my limbs off one by one!’ cried Sikes, seizing her roughly 
by the arm, ‘if I don’t think the gal’s stark raving mad. Get up.’ 

399 



Nasir TWIST 


‘ Not till you let me go - not till you let me go - Never - never! ’ 
screamed the girl. Sikes looked on, for a minute, watching his 
opportunity, and suddenly pinioning her hands dragged her, " 
struggling and wrestling with him by the way, into a small room 
adjoining, where he sat himself on a bench, and thrusting her into 
a chair, held her down by force. She struggled and implored by 
turns until twelve o’clock had struck, and then, wearied and ex- 
hausted, ceased to contest the point any farther. With a caution, 
backed by many oaths, to make no more efforts to go out that night, 
Sikes left her to recover at leisure and rejoined Fagin. 

‘Whew!’ said the housebreaker, wiping the perspiration from 
his face. ‘Wot a precious strange gal that isl* 

‘You may say that, Bill,’ replied Fagin thoughtfully. ‘You may 
say that.’ 

‘Wot did she take it into her head to go out tonight for, do you 
think asked Sikes. ‘